 A bachelor god in search of a wife. Echo ; or, the cave fairy. The prince of reed-throwers. The origin of kite-flying. A kite song for Tenio's fte. Uti's torch; or, wiU-a-wisp. Mosquitoes. xxiv Contents. PAGE 'The-long-lived.' Human arts and Inventions. Perils of beauty. Origin of pigs at Rarotpnga. Seeking for light. Rata's canoe. Prayer or charm for a thief or a murderer I0 7 VIII. -HADES; OR, THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITWORLD. Aitutakian hell. Aitutakian heaven. Dramatic song of Miru. Sneezing. A farewell chanted at a reed-throwing match for women. 152 IX. VEETINI; OR, THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL. Vaipo's dirge for Vetini. The closing or day-song for Tenio's fete. Vetini meeting his father. Dirge for Vera. The ghosts led by Vera preparing for their final departure. Puvai leading a band of ghosts to the shades. Koroa's lament for his son Kourapapa. Another lament for Kourapapa. Death lament for Varenga. Lament for Mourua. A spirit-journey. Introduction to the fete of Riuvaka iSi X. ADVENTURES IN SPIRITWORLD. An escape from spirit-land. The adventures of Ngaru. The drama of Ngaru. The ball-thrower's song. A journey to the invisible world 221 XL FAIRY MEN AND WOMEN. Tapairu ; or, fairy women and men. A song in honour of Mauapa. Prologue to the dramatic fte of Potiki. The fairy of the fountain 256 XII. DEATH-TALKS AND DIRGES. Ghost-killing. Death-talks. Eva, or dirge-proper. Karaponga's dirgeproper in honour of Ruru. Arokapiti's dirge-proper in honour of Ruru. ' Blackened face ' dirge-proper for Atiroa. The first murder and the first battle 268 XIII. HUMAN SACRIFICES. Why human sacrifices were offered. The drum of peace. Prayer over a human sacrifice to Rongo. Prayer for peace. Kirikovi's sacrifice. A 'crying' song for Maruata. The death of Ngutuku. Makitaka's lament 289 XIV. THE SEASONS, PHASES OF THE MOON, ETC., ETC. The seasons. Changes of the moon. The mariner's compass of Polynesia. Polynesian plurals. Polynesian numeration 316 MYTHS AND SONGS FROM THE SOUTH PACIFIC CHAPTER I. MYTHS OF CREATION. THE BEGINNING OF ALL THINGS. THE universe of these islanders is to be conceived of as the hollow of a vast cocoa-nut shell, as in the accompanying diagram. (See next page.) The interior of this imaginary shell is named Avaiki. At the top is a single aperture communicating with the upper world, where mortals (i.e. Mangaians) live. At various depths are different floorings, or lands, communicating with each other. But at the very bottom of this supposed cocoa-nut shell is a thick stem, gradually tapering to a point, which represents the very beginning of all things. This point is a spirit or demon, without human form, and is named Te-aka-ia-Roe, 1 or Thc-root-of-all-cxistence. The entire 1 Roe thread -woim. The idea is of a quivering, slender, worm-like point, at which existence begins, i.g. the extremity of the thread-worm. B Myths and Songs. fabric of the universe is constantly sustained by this primary being.  stronger than the former one. But the thickest part of the stem is Te-manava-roa, or The-long-liwd, the third and last of the primary, ever-stationary, sentient spirits, who themselves constitute the foundation, and insure the permanence and well-being of all the rest of the universe. We advance now to the interior of the supposed cocoa-nut shell. In the lowest depth of Avaiki, where the sides of the imaginary shell nearly meet, lives a woman a demon, of flesh and blood named Vari-ma-te-takere, 1 or The-very-beginning. Such is the narrowness of her territory that her knees and chin touch, no other position being possible. Vari-ma-te-takere was very anxious for progeny. One day she plucked off a bit of her right side, and it became a human being the first man Avatea, or Vatea (the elision of the a in Avatea is compensated by the elongation of the second vowel). Now Vatea, the father of gods and men, was half man and half fish, the division being like the two halves of the human body. The species of fish to which this great divinity was allied being the taairangi (Cetacca), or great sea monsters, i.e. porpoises, whose sides are covered with pure fat, and whose home is the boundless ocean. Thus one eye of Vatea was human, the other a fish-eye. His right side was furnished with an arm ; the left with a fin. He had one proper foot, and half a fish-tail. But there is another, and probably far more ancient, account of Vatea, or Avatea, which means noon in all the dialects of Eastern Polynesia. 2 Vatea is a man possessed of two magnificent eyes, rarely visible at the same time. In general, whilst one, 1 Literally, Th*btginning-and-the<>bottom of the hollow cocoa-nut shell 2 Vatea is the Wakea of the Hawaiians, with a similar meaning and history. Myths and Songs. called by mortals the sun, is seen here in this upper world, the other eye, called by men the moon, shines in AvaikL (A contra dictory myth represents the sun and moon as living beings.) IMAGINARY REPRESENTATION OF VATEA. Compare with, this a remarkable picture of a fish-god, from Layard, in Smith V Dictionary of the Bible, p. 381 (central picture). The land assigned by the Great Mother to Vatca was Tepapa-rairai, or TJie-thin-Iand. Another designation for his home was Te enua marama o Vatea, or The-bright-hind-of-VatM^ implying the perfect contrast between the brightness of mwntoy, or Avatea, and the utter gloom of Po, or night which is equivalent to Avaiki. On another occasion Vari-ma-te-takere tore off a second bit from that same right side, and it became Tinirati, or ///numerable, who, like his brother, had a second and fishy form. Myths of Creation. The sort of fish which composed his half fish body was of the sprat-kind. The Great Mother gave him the land of MotuTapu, or Sacred Isle as his own domain. 1 There were his celebrated ponds full of all kinds of fish. Tinirau was lord of the finny inhabitants of the sea, from the shark downwards. Another day Vari-ma-te-takere took a bit off her left side, and it became Tango, or Support, who went to live at Enua-Kura, 2 or The-land-of-red-parrot-feathers* A fourth child was produced from a bit of the same left side, and was named Tumuteanaoa, or Echo, whose home was Te-paraitea, or The-hollow-grey-rocks. Echo is represented as a female. A fifth child originated from a bit of that same left side of the Great Mother, and was designated Raka, or Trouble, who presides, like Aeolus, over the winds. Raka found a congenial home in Moana-Irakau, or Deep-ocean. Raka received from Vari-mate-takere a great basket in which the winds were hidden ; also the knowledge of many useful inventions. The children of Raka are the numerous winds and storms which distress mankind. To each child is allotted a hole at the edge of the horizon, through which he blows at pleasure. Van, or The-very-beginning, finding that her left side had been more injured than her right, resolved to make both sides alike by taking a third bit from the right side, and named this, her last child, Tu-metua, Stick-by4he-parenL Now, this sixth and most beloved child, as the name implies, lives with the Great Mother in 1 At Ngatangiia, Rarotonga, there is an islet, covered with cocoa-nut trees, so named. This is, of course, a modem identification. The '* Sacred Isle ' is supposed to be in the shades. 2 Manuae, or Hervey's Island : yet mystically the scene is laid in Avaiki, Myths and Songs. that narrow strip of territory constituting the very bottom of Avaiki, and which is designated Te-enua-te-ki, or Tk-mute4and. Do what you may to the attached mother and daughter, you cannot provoke an angry reply; for the only language known in The-mute-land is that of signs such as nods, elevated eyebrows, grimaces, and smiles. It is to The-mute-land that Potiki, temporal lord of Mangaia, circa 1790, referred in a f6te song : E enua parere i Avaiki In Avaiki is a land of strange utterance, E enua mu matangi e ! Like the sighs of the passing breeze ; Kua le Tautiti nei Wheie the dance is performed in silence, Aore e kite i te tara e ! And the gift of speech fc unknown. Tu-metua is usually shortened into 7}/, a principal god in most of the Polynesian mythologies, to whom the fourteenth night in every ' moon ' was sacred. On Cook's second visit to Tahiti, he found the king to be Otoo, ancestor of the present Pomare. Otoo should be written Tu, the being a mere prefix to all proper names. This mythological name was adopted in order to secure for its owner the superstitious reverence due to the gods which are unseen by mortals. Tu was the tutelar goddess of Moorea. On Mangaia Tu was invariably linked with her nephew Tangaroa ; but was little regarded. The second islet of Hervey's Island is known as ' the kingdom of Tu ' (au-o-Tu). At Raiatea Tu-papa = Tu-of4he-lowe$t-dcptfis (the same as Tu-metua) becomes the wife of Ra, the Sun-god, whose too frequent visits to her home required to be checked by Maui. It was deemed by Vari very unseemly that Vatea's land, which originally was immediately above her own, should be underneath, Myths of Creation. and so to speak invaded by, his younger brothers'. The-verybeginning, therefore, altered the relative position of The-thinland, 1 placing it directly under the opening from this upper world; so that the law of primogeniture was established, the lands of all the younger brothers thus lying underneath the territory of Noon-day. Vatea in his dreams several times saw a beautiful woman. On one happy occasion he succeeded in clutching her in his sleep, and thus detained the fair sprite as his wife in his home in Te-papa-rairai. Another account asserts that on Vatea's waking from sleep he could discover no trace of the fair one. He searched in all directions for her but in vain. At length it occurred to him that her home might be in some dark cavern communicating with a land lower than his own, from which the fair one was in the habit of ascending to The-thin-land to pay him nocturnal visits. To test the correctness of this supposition, Vatea scraped a quantity of cocoa-nuts and scattered handfuls down all the chasms in his territory. Some time afterwards he found that from the bottom of one cave, named Taevarangi, or 27ic-cclcstial-aperture, the rich white food had entirely disappeared. A fresh lot of the same dainty food was now thrown down, whilst Vatea from behind a projecting crag cautiously peered down. It was not long before a slender hand, very unlike his own, was slowly extended towards the coveted morsels. Vatea at once concluded that this must belong to the woman he had 1 It was from The-thin-land that Potai sagely conjectured that Captain Cook had come. ' Era, e te matakeinanga, no raro i Te-papa-rairai i Vatea ' == 'Surely, friends^ he has climbed tip from The-thin-land> the home of Vatea' How? By breaking through the solid sides of the vast cocoa-nut shell. 8 Myths and Songs. seen in his dreams. With a favouring current of wind, he descended to the bottom, and caught the fair thief. His visions were realized; this lovely one confessed that she had again and again ascended to his house above in The-thin-land in order to win him as her future husband. She correctly guessed that Vatea, would never rest until he had discovered the whereabouts of the fair coquette, and made her his wife. She informed her lover that she was Papa, or Foundation, the daughter of Timatekore, or N0iAing-more, and his wife Tamaiti-ngava-ringavari, or Soft-bodied. The famed Papa thus became the cherished wife of Vatea ; both ascended by another eddy of wind through the chasm to The-bright-land-of-Vatea ! DRAMATIC SONG OF CREATION. FOR THE llTE OF POTIKI, CIRCA 1790. Call for the dance to begin with music. Noo mai Van i te aiti, The home of Van is the narrowest of all, I te tuturi i te memenge Knees and chin ever meeting E Kongo e, a kake ! It was reserved for Kongo to ascend. x Solo. Taipo el Go on 1 Chorus. Vatea kite i tena vaine ; 'Twos in the shades Vatea first saw his wife, 1 moe ana paa i reira e ! And fondly pressed her to his bosom. Solo. Ae ! Aye ! 1 Kongo often came up from the shades to this upper -vv orld ; Vari never. Myths of Creation. 9 Te ui a te metua i anau ai la Timatekore ! la Timatekore ! Aore o tatou metua, ua tu e, I Vari ua mai e I Noo mai Vari e ! I te aiti ae ! Noo mai Vari i te aiti ; E tuarangi kai taro mata I na turanga pure e ! O Vatea metua e pua ua ake. Pua ua o Vatea, O Papa i te itinga, Vari-ma-te-takere 1 tapakau ana e ! Chorus. When asked who was her (Papa's) father, She said Timatekore! (Nothing more). Solo. Most truly, Timatekore. But WE have NO x father whatever : Vari alone made us. Solo. That home of Vari is The very narrowest of all I Chorus. Van's home is in the narrowest of spaces, A goddess feeding 2 on raw ' taro ' z At appointed periods of worship ! Thy mother, Vatea, is self-existent. Solo. Vatea sprung into existence. Papa is bright as the morn. Vari-the-originator-of-all-things Sheltered her (Papa) under her wing. FINALE. Call to begin. le taia ia Maukurautaroa Let the storm be restrained Te rua i te matangi, e Vatea e ! In favour of Vatea, thou god of winds ! 1 Papa could boast of father and mother ; but tjie children of Vari were simply moulded out of bits of her own body. An allusion is intended to the belief that the three original tribes are descended from the three illegitimate sons of Tevaki. 2 A& a matter of fact, however, Vari and Vatea had no altars and no separate worship ; but the grandchildren of Vari had. 8 Arum esculentum. TO Myths and Songs. Taipo e ! Taotao matangi na Jna Te kumutonga. O nai matangi riki e Ka arara'i oki toku tere Ki raro e I A taia e te matangi. Taia e te matangi O Tukaiaa te tai makoako. Koakoa e o tei po Kai matangi ru-eke e ! Solo. Go on 1 Chorus. Awake the gentle breeze of Ina That bare her to her lover. Solo. O for a soft zephyr to bear me ( Vatea) Prosperously on my way To the shades ! Solo. Be lulled, ye winds. Chorus. Aye, they ai c lulled. No storm Now sweeps o'er the treacherous sea. Solo. Ye inconstant winds of nether-land Bear me down to her gloomy abode.