AN ESCAPE FROM SPIRIT-LAND. IN the Sacred Islet lived Eneene, his wife Kura, and his sister Umuei. These women were young and fair, and loved to roam the woods in quest of sweet-scented flowers, which they weaved into wreaths and necklaces. On one occasion they fortunately discovered a noble bua (beslaria laurifolia)^ whose far-spreading branches were covered with fragrant yellow blossoms. The sisters-in-law sat awhile at the foot of the tree discussing the division of the spoil. It was clear that Kura should collect on one side of the tree, and Umuei on the other. But the great central branch seemed the richest prize of all It was eventually agreed that Kura should have this treasure. The young women set to work in good earnest ; but, after a time, it became evident that Kura was gathering more than fell to her share. To punish her, Umuei took possession of the coveted central branch. The wife of Eneene was speedily chastised for her covetousness without the intervention of Umuei ; for the branch on which she was leaning heavily in order to steal some of 222 Myths and Songs. her sister-in-law's, suddenly broke. Kura, basket and all, fell with the branch of the sacred tree, cleaving the earth, and continued to fall until she reached Avaiki, or spirit-world. The ghosts, happening to be on the look-out, caught her in their arms, so that she was not killed by the fall. The captive Kura was hurried off to a considerable distance, and at once firmly tied up to the central post of a house. It was settled by these infernals called "the army of Marama " that to-morrow Kura should be cooked and eaten. A special guard was set over her, both blind and aged, named Tiarauau. At regular intervals the old fellow would shout, " E Kura e ! " (O Kura), to which the unvarying reply of the victim was, " E Tiarauau e ! " (0 Tiarauau). Thus was the blind wakeful guardian assured of the safety of his prisoner. Now Umuei, witnessing the sudden fall and entire disappearance of Kura into the very bosom of the earth, ran weeping to inform Eneene. Anxious, if possible, to recover his wife, he bethought himself of his god Tumatarauua, himself manufactured out of the bua. Invoking the aid of the god, and carrying it in his arms, he went to the very spot where his wife had lately disappeared ; and, pronouncing the invocation to the divinity of the sacred "bua tree, the earth opened and he descended to spiritland. Eneene at once began his search for his beloved young wife, so suddenly removed from his sight. Now the name of that particular part of nether-world was Marama. As, fortunately for Eneene, it was night at the period of his entrance, his presence in the shades was unnoticed. Anxiously wandering about from place to place, he heard the loud interrogations of the old blind keeper and the replies of Kura herself. His lost wife was found ; but the puzzle was how to get her away without exciting the suspicions of Tiarauau and other hungry denizens of the shades, Adventures in Spirit-World. 223 Cautiously peering in all directions through the darkness, he discovered a cocoa-nut tree with eight cocoa-nuts on it. Eneene climbed the tree, carefully plucked a single nut : holding the stem between his teeth, he silently descended to the ground. This process was repeated again and again, until the tree was cleared, without attracting the notice of the ever-watchful Tiarauau. With extreme care during that long night Eneene succeeded in husking the nuts and scraping out their contents, too, without noise. There were eight paths leading to the house where Kura was kept prisoner. Eneene was careful liberally to scatter the finely grated cocoa-nut over all these pathways, and close to the house itself. The rats, scenting the rich food, now came by hundreds to feast themselves. They even fought and quarrelled over the delicious morsels, not only on the ground but on the low-thatched roof, enough to drive a man out of his senses. Certainly it seemed strange to Tiarauau that the rats should be so unusually noisy. Amidst this turmoil, Eneene climbed the roof and cautiously removed part of the thatch to discover in what part of the house his wife was tied up. At this moment the old blind guardian called out, " O Kura ! " Listening intently to the reply, he discovered that his poor trembling young wife was in the middle of the dwelling. Advancing to where the voice seemed to come from, Eneene carefully removed part of the thatch, put down his hand and touched his imprisoned wife. The astonished Kura asked in an undertone, "Who that was?" and received the joyful answer, " Your own husband Eneene." The roof of the house was sufficiently low to permit the husband to untie the cords by which his wife was tied up to the post He then drew her up on the roof to himself. Eneene now directed her to descend to the ground, and run off as fast as she could to the foot of the closed 224 Myths and Songs. chasm by which she had so summarily entered Avaiki, and there to await his arrival. Eneene now let himself down through the low roof, and occupied the place of the released prisoner, so as to give her time to escape. The old guard called out as usual, " O Kura ! " to which Eneene replied, closely imitating the voice of his wife, " O Tiarauau ! " The trick was not discovered, either by Tiarauau or the drowsy inmates of the prison-house. Eneene now thought it to be high time to provide for his own safety. Crawling up through the hole in the thatch, he cautiously let himself on the ground and ran as nimbly as he could to the appointed rendezvous, where he found his trembling wife waiting for him. There was no time to be lost, for he could hear the echo of Tiarauau's stentorian voice giving the alarm. Clasping his wife in his arms, he offered the following prayer to his god : Pupu-kakaoa, United in one fate, Pureke-pureke, We ascend, we rise, E ao, e ao 1 To light, to light, Kua avatea ! To clear mid-day. At these potent words the gloomy rent again opened, and both were borne through the chasm up to this world of ours, where it was still daylight A moment later, and the enraged "army of Marama " would have caught Eneene and Kura, so close were those infernal hosts upon their heels. The dua was in some islands used in the manufacture of idols, on account of its fine grain and being almost imperishable. The purport of the myth is to indicate the standard faith of the past that the souls of the dead congregate on this tree, and on its branches are borne by a merciless fate to Hades. Adventures in Spirit-World. 225 THE ADVENTURES OF NGARU. In Shady-Land 1 (Mania) there lived the brave Ngaru, his mother Vaiare, and the grandfather of the lad, who was no other than Moko, or Great Lizard, the king of all lizards. Tongatea, the youthful wife of Ngaru, was the envy of all Shady-Land on account of her fairness. Thirsting for distinction, Ngaru resolved to try his strength against some of the numerous monsters and evil spirits of his time. He learned from his grandfather that two fierce enemies of mankind had their appropriate home in the ocean, viz. Tikokura, or the-storm-wave^ and Tumuitearetoka, or a vast shark, which fed exclusively upon human flesh. These evil spirits always went in each other's company; but Ngaru determined to meet both. The enterprise seemed hopeless ; for who had ever escaped their anger? Ngaru's first care was to provide himself with a surf-board of the lightest description, which he named Orua = the-two, in allusion to the two seagods he was about to encounter. He now appeared on the inner edge of the reef, carrying his surf-board ; but the wide coral surface was perfectly dry. Moko sat on a projecting crag of rock to watch over the safety of his grandson, who now advanced to the outer edge of the reef, where the surf ceaselessly beats, and loudly cursed these sea-monsters by name. Tikokura and Tumuitearetoka smarted under this unprovoked insult, and resolved to be revenged on Ngaru without delay. All of a sudden the dead calm which had made the reef dry changed into a furious tempest Long breakers rushed inland far beyond the accustomed bounds of the sea, and spent themselves against the gnarled roots of the utu trees. Moko still kept his place on his rocky eminence, 1 That is, the shades. Q 226 Myths and Songs. whilst his grandson floated daringly out to sea on the crest of the retreating billow. The shark-god, perceiving his opportunity, crept stealthily behind his intended victim, and was preparing for the final leap which would seal the fate of the impious Ngaru, when the quick eye of Moko caught sight of his dark outline, and shouted lustily to the boy, "The shark is under you." Ngaru, hearing this, instantly leapt high in the air, so that this first attempt failed. The foe now leapt in the air after Ngaru ; but he dived under the water and again escaped. The disappointed god was excessively enraged ; so that it was needful for Ngaru to put forth all his skill and strength to avoid the open jaws of the monster. Tumuitearetoka became crafty; but Ngaru was still craftier : Moko often giving his pet grandson timely warning of the insidious approach of the adversary. For eight weary days and nights this terrible contest went on, until the exhausted Ngaru put an end to it by throwing his surf-board to the sea-monsters, who gladly retired to their ancient haunts in the deep blue ocean. Great was the delight of the old grandfather and of his countrymen at the exploit of Ngaru, the first who had dared the sea-gods in their own domain, and yet had escaped with life. But the hero himself was sadly battered, and his skin excoriated with the sharp coral. He made his way home ; but on the road fell in with his fair wife Tongatea, Arrived at a fountain, they determined to bathe ; but a friendly dispute took place who should have the first dip. It was finally arranged that the husband -should take the precedence. Once in, Ngaru was in no hurry to get out At sunset he got out, and the wife was horrified to find that his skin had become almost black through long exposure to salt-water, during the mighty contest with the monsters of the deep. Reviling Ngaru for his blackness, she ran off to her friends. Adventures in Spirit-World. 227 When at length Ngaru reached home, Moko inquired what had become of his fair spouse, and learnt that, disgusted with her husband's appearance, she had fled to Teautapu. Said Moko, " Nothing blackens the skin so soon as the sea and the sun." The grandson inquired how his skin could be blanched. Moko said, "The only way to blanch your skin is to treat you as green bananas are treated when they are to be ripened. 1 Ngaru agreed to this proposal. Accordingly they dug a deep hole in the ground, and lined it with layers of sweet-scented fern-leaves. Ngaru descended into this hole, and was duly covered with leaves ; a thin layer of earth crowned the whole. On the eighth day flashes of lightning proceeded from the spot where Ngaru had so long been buried, increasing in intensity until it smote away earth and leaves, permitting him to emerge from his strange abode. It then became evident that these flashes of light proceeded from the face and person of Ngaru, being in reality the dazzling fairness of his skin. But there was one drawback : the steam of the blanching oven had rendered Ngaru perfectly bald. Moko sent his mother Vaiare to great Tangaroa, to ask for some new hair. It was given ; but when Moko examined it, it proved to be frizzly. Moko resolved not to spoil the head of his fair grandson with such a wretched mop. Vaiare took it back to the god, and asked for some better hair. Tangaroa put the suppliant off with some light yellow.* " This will never do," said Moko ; " I must have the best." Once more Vaiare trudged back to the god to beg him to exchange the hair. Finding that there was no escape from the importunity of the grandfather, 1 In the native language "ta-para," or blanched: Europeans would say "ripened." 2 A detestable colour in the eyes of a Hervey Islander. Tangaroa's own hair was of the objectionable light yellow. 228 Myths and Songs. Tangaroa gave a profusion of wavy, smooth raven locks. Moko was delighted, and gladly secured it to the bald pate of his fair grandson. The lightning, or dazzling flashes of light, from the face and person of Ngaru reached even to the distant abode of Tongatea (^the fair Tongari), so that everybody said, "Behold the dazzling fairness of Ngaru ! " Said the runaway wife, " This Ngaru you praise must be a different individual from the Ngaru I know." The bystanders asserted that it was her despised husband ; but Tongatea remained incredulous. Now, Tongatea had got up a reed-throwing match for women ; but men were invited from all parts to decide upon the merits of the game, and to applaud the successful throwers. At the time appointed all the fair ones, gaily attired and covered with fragrant garlands, stood ready to begin the amusement of the day, each with a long reed in her right hand. Tongatea, as mistress of the day, was about to make the first throw, when 'Ngaru made his appearance, and was at once recognized by the fair runaway. Her arm fell powerless by her side. She struggled to conceal her emotion, and to proceed with the game, but could not. Such a violent tremor seized Tongatea, that it was with difficulty that she retained her garments about her person. All was confusion : the intended sport of the day was lost. As the visitors disappeared, the weeping, repentant, love-smitten wife followed Ngaru, entreating him to return to her. Ngaru, in whose heart still rankled the bitter insult in reference to his former dusky colour, in this moment of triumph said to the penitent, " Never will I return to thee." The despairing Tongatea hearing this, set off in search of some poisonous kokii kura, chewed it, and died. There lived in Avaiki, or netherworld, a fierce she-demon, Adventures in Spirzt-World. 229 named Miru, who, envious of the great fame of Ngaru, resolved to destroy him in her fearful, ever-blazing oven. But before enjoying this horrid banquet, it was needful to decoy him into her domains. Nor did this seem difficult She at once directed two Tapairu, or peerless ones her daughters to ascend to this upper world to induce the brave Ngaru to marry them both. Kumutonga-i-te-po =? Kumutonga-of-the-nigkt, and Karaia-i-te-ata = Karaia-the-shadowy, were to induce him to pay a visit to the shades in their agreeable society : once there, his fate was sealed in Mini's estimation. On their entering the dwelling of Moko, Ngaru feigned to be asleep, whilst his grandfather tried to discover their real intent. They averred that their mother, Mini, had sent them to escort Ngaru to Avaiki ; that as soon as they arrived, Ngaru was to be united to both these " peerless women, " with whom the daughters of mortals could not for a moment be compared. Moko, suspecting the real nature of their visit, sought to gain time by exercising the utmost hospitality to his unwonted guests. Whilst these fairy women were enjoying themselves, the king of lizards (Moko) sent his servants, i.e. all the little lizards, 1 on a secret mission to Mini's domains in the under world to ascertain what dangerous weapons were at her disposal, and what were her usual avocations. Off scampered the little lizards in all possible haste; and on arriving at Avaiki, unperceived by Mini, they noticed that the old, deformed, and inexpressibly ugly hag had a house full of kava (piper mythzsticum), kept exclusively for the purpose of stupefying her intended victims, who were 1 The black and yellow lizards hide during tlie day in the caves supposed to be the high-road to spirit-land ; whereas the common green variety suns itself all the day on the leaves and grass. 230 Myths and Songs. eventually cooked in her mighty oven, and eaten by herself, her fair children, and her servants. These little keen-sighted lizards safely returned to this upper world, and reported to their sovereign what they had discovered. Moko privately told this to ^ his son, and admonished him to be careful, or he would infallibly perish, as multitudes had done before him. As evening ^ drew on, all three started off on their journey to the land of Mini in the shades. The mode of transit was peculiar. These " peerless ones " had with them rolls of finest tapa, in which they insisted upon wrapping up their future husband ; they then secured the bundle well with cords, and slung to a long pole, carried off Ngaru in triumph. After some time Kumutonga-of-the-night and Karaiathe-shadowy began to ascend a mountain named " Theheavenly," when the imprisoned husband became conscious of a steep and sudden movement, and prayed thus : Oi au tiria, tiria Put me down, put me down. Oi au tara, tara Set me free, set me free. Taraia akera Oh that I had liberty Kia kite au i teia maunga To gaze on this mountain I O te maunga poro oa teia 'Tis surely the mountain spoken of A tau tupuna a Moko Roa, By my grandfather, " The longLizard j " Tau metua a Vaiare, And by my mother Vaiare (stay-athome}.' 1 Tau vaine a Tongatea. And by my wife, ' < The fair Tongan. " To this Kumutonga and Karaia responded (temporarily releasing Ngaru) : Kiritia kai e kinana ! Thou shalt be forthwith devoured 1 To koivi, vaio i Erangi maunga ! Thy body shall rot on this " Heavenly mountain, " 1 Evidently in allusion to sickness. The sick " stay at home." Adventures in Spirit-World. 231 To vaerua, e kave i te po Thy spirit shall be borne to the shades, Na to maua metua na Mini ! To furnish a repast for our mother Mini. To this Ngaru replied, "Tis thus you treat your intended husband 1" Again wrapping up and cording their intended victim, they bore him to another spur of the same mountain range. Conscious of this, the imprisoned victim again prayed to be released : Oi au tiria, tiria, etc., etc. Put me down, put me down, etc., etc. To this entreaty the same ominous reply was given as before : Kiritia kai e kinana ! etc. Thou shalt be forthwith devoured, etc. To this Ngaru replied, "Tis thus you treat your intended husband ! " At this the " peerless ones " again seized upon Ngaru, wrapped him again in numerous folds of tapa, and well securing their victim with cords, bore him along until, reaching a shady grove of chestnut trees, they set him down and unfastened the cords. These fairy women now hastened to fetch some kava, * named " Mini's own," and gave it to him to chew. Ngaru chewed the whole, and still, to their amazement, remained wakeful and active : on him alone of the children of men the powerful narcotic failed to produce its usual effects. The ever-blazing oven of Mini was ready for its victim. The voice of the pitiless Mini was now heard: " Kumutonga-of-the-night and Karaia-the-shadowy, bring along your husband; the oven of Mini is waiting for him." At these words Ngaru put on the girdle his grandfather 1 The three sorts of " kava " known in this world are but offshoots from the original root. 232 Myths and Songs. had wisely provided for his use. Thus equipped, the dauntless visitor from the upper world proceeded in search of the hag Mini and her dread oven. At this juncture the voice of the anxious Moko was heard in the shades : "Return, Ngaru yonder is the oven in which she means to cook you." Heedless of this warning, the brave visitor went on his way, and finding the red-hot stones of the oven raked ready for the victim, he asked the horrid mistress of the invisible world what she meant to do with this burning oven. Mini promptly replied, " To cook you!" Ngaru reproached her thus : "Ah, Mini ! my grandfather Moko did not prepare an oven for your daughters ; but gave them food to eat, cocoa-nut water to drink, and sent them away in peace ! You cook and devour your visitors ! " At these words the heavens became intensely black. Ngaru walked to the edge of the flaming oven, and placed one foot on the red-hot stones. At this critical moment the clouds, which had been gathering ever since he had entered Avaiki, burst suddenly. A fearful deluge 1 of waters extinguished the blazing oven, and swept away Mini herself, her younger fairy daughters, and all her servants and accomplices. Ngaru was saved by clutching hold of the stem of the nono, 2 the beautiful Tapairu girls, who allured him to the domains of Mini, held each by one of his legs, and so escaped the fateof their mother and sisters. These fairies taught Ngaru the art of ball-throwing. After a time the waters entirely abated. Ngaru, wearied of the society of these attractive but dangerous fairy women, succeeded in finding a dark, winding passage to a land called 1 A deluge-myth, is inserted in a forthcoming popular volume, entitled " Life in the Southern Seas." 2 Morindo cUrifolia. Its root is wonderfully tenacious. Adventures in Spirit-World. 233 Taumareva ( = expansd), where fruits and flowers grow profusely, and the inhabitants of which excelled in flute-playing. 1 Here he married a girl kept by her parents inside a house in order to whiten her skin. Time passed pleasantly in this new residence. But one day two pretty little birds, known as " Karakerake," perched upon the ledge of a pile of rocks. Ngaru immediately recognized them as belonging to Moko, and asked them whether they came at his grandfather's bidding. The birds nodded assent, whilst Ngaru wept for joy, and prayed thus : Karakerake e, tukua iora te tauraJ Ye little birds, pray drop a cord : O te taura oa tena i tukuia 'i o maua Aye, tlie cord used for the imperious ariki O Raka maumau e. Tukua, tukua Oraka,* the all-devouring. Drop, ra ikona ! drop it at once ! At these words two cords fell, one from the feet of each bird. Securing himself by means of this double rope, Ngaru gave the signal to the birds, and without a word of farewell to his late spouse and her musical countrymen, was borne aloft 'to this upper world, and was safely deposited in the presence of Moko, who had long been ill, pining for the presence of his brave Ngaru, so long a prisoner in the shades. Ngaru had conquered the monsters of the deep; had conquered the aversion of the proud Tongatea; had been buried in the earth ; had descended to the shades, where he had proved victor over the hitherto unconquered Miru and her satellites. One more trial was reserved for Ngaru, ere he should be permitted to live in peace. The last foe was a heavenly one. 1 A piece of bamboo pierced with three holes, and blown through the nose. 2 Oraka, && " Auraka," the dreadful chasm down which the dead were thrown : here, " the gates of Hades" 234 Myths and Songs. One day the people of this world were astonished at the sight of a large basket (some say " a vast fish-hook ") let down from the sky. Two or three anxious to see the wonders of the upper world, hitherto unexplored, entered the basket and were speedily drawn up out of sight. Not many days after, this process was repeated; but it came to be noticed, after a time, that none ever came down again to report what they had seen. This looked decidedly suspicious. The fact was, a sky-demon named Amai-te-rangi, or Carry-up-to-heaven, had taken a fancy to feed on human flesh, and had invented the basket and ropes as a means of satisfying hunger. Hearing from his victims of the prowess of Ngaru, he resolved to entrap and devour him. Now the basket itself was a very attractive object, and on the day of Ngaru's return from his visits to the invisible world it was let down close to the dwelling of Moko. Ngaru, regarding this as a challenge, determined to ascend and have a fight with its owner. The more wily Moko detained his heroic grandson until his faithful little lizard subjects should go up and find out what was going on in the sky. The word having been given by The-king-of-lizards, a number of his sharp-eyed attendants entered the basket, which was speedily pulled up by Amai-te-rangi. On discovering that he had only caught a number of miserable little reptiles, he was greatly chagrined. Meanwhile the nimble subjects of Moko overran the place. When next the basket was let down, they were permitted to go down in it. They reported to Moko what they had seen : the gigantic size of " Carry-up-to-heaven ; " beautiful women engaged in ball throwing ; a huge chisel and mallet in the hands of the sky demon ; and piles of human bones. Ngaru fearlessly got into the beautiful basket, and was at once drawn up by the delighted Amai-te-rangi, who anticipated a good Adventures in Spirit-World. 235 feast, as the intended victim was uncommonly heavy. Upon touching the magnificent paving of blue stone, Ngaru found the demon drawn out to his full size, chisel and mallet in hand ready to deal the fatal blow. At this moment the human hero gave it a sudden jerk, that precipitated himself and the basket down to earth again. The disappointed demon hastily drew up Ngaru again, resolving not to permit him to escape a second time. But the grandson of Moko was not to be outwitted ; for as soon as the basket again touched the solid vault of heaven, he once more jerked it back to earth. Amai-te-rangi eight times pulled his ropes, until his strength was nearly exhausted ; but at last, to his satisfaction, saw Ngaru coolly walk out of the basket and confront his giant foe, who again prepared to deal the fatal blow with that chisel from which no mortal had hitherto escaped. Now Moko had foreseen all this, and to provide for the safety of Ngaru, each time the basket touched the ground had sent into it a number of lizards, which leaped out on the sky as soon as the basket touched the blue paving, unregarded by the demon, whose whole thoughts were concentrated on the destruction of this fearless human enemy. At the moment his huge arms were uplifted to effect the murder of Ngaru, all these faithful guardians rushed up the legs of Amai-te-rangi, covering his face, neck, arms, and body. Particularly clustering about the armpits, they tickled the giant to such a degree that it was impossible for him to strike with precision. Again and again the monster endeavoured to brush off these little fellows from his naked body, so that he might accomplish his purpose; but the lizards pertinaciously returned to their appointed task of distracting Amai-terangi's thoughts and movements, until at length this cruel enemy of mankind, utterly unable to slay Ngaru, and tickled almost 236 Myths and Songs. to madness, dropped chisel and mallet. Ngaru, seizing these weapons, succeeded in killing Arnai-te-rangi, and then let himself down to earth again, accompanied by his four-footed protectors, and carrying with him the chisel and mallet of his slain foe. Ere leaving, he tried ball-throwing with Ina and Matonga, who kept eight balls going at a time, and succeeded in beating them too. Such were the exploits of this Polynesian Hercules. In the original, when describing the repentance of Tongatea at the reed-throwing match, the question is asked, " Whose place in Manow is vacant?" The reply is, "Tongatea's." " Why, then, does she. not begin?" There is a spot on Mangaia so named; but every one believes that the reference is to the island of " Manono," in the Samoan Group. The wife's name, " Tongatea," means Thefair-Tongan. I believe this story to have been one brought by the original settlers when they came originally from Avaiki, or Savai'i. It is no objection to this view that the myth, as now told, is localized here, as a long residence would be sure to produce this. The proper depositories of such lore invariably assert that they were introduced here from other lands. The story of Mini is merely a vivid representation of their old belief as to the state of those who die a natural death. Fairy women come to fetch Ngaru : he is like any other corpse, wrapped up in tapa, and well corded, and borne by two individuals to the deep cavernous domain of Miru " Oraka " is but a disguise for "Auraka," the great repository of their dead, from which two cords pull up the victor upon his return to life. In this story Miru and all her servants and two of her "peerless" daughters perish. The ever-burning oven, too, is Adventures in Spirit-World. 237 extinguished. But the standard belief of the past represents Miru as immortal, and the oven as still blazing and consuming the spirits of all who die a natural death. Does not this myth express a deep-seated hope and intense yearning after that real victory over death and hell which Christianity alone can satisfy? Apai-te-rangi is in heaven the exact counterpart of Miru in the shades; but still a man of divine descent Ngaru comes off victor ! It is a curious fact that one family on Mangaia claims descent from this sky-demon Apai-te-rangi. But this heavenly descent did not prevent the " Amai" tribe from being devoted to furnish sacrifices to Rongo from generation to generation. (The name is. indifferently spelt Amai and Apai.) As Miru in the shades is the parent of Tapairu, or " peerless " fairy women, so in the sky Apai-i-te-rangi has about him a set of Tapairu women, whose sole employment is ball-throwing some keeping seven, others eight, balls going at a time. One of these heavenly fairies is Ina, another is named Matonga. Ngaru introduced the art to this world. The basket of the heavenly monster is the counterpart of the stupefying kava, of Miru, his chisel and mallet answering to the fiery oven of the shades. 238 Myths and Songs. THE DRAMA OF NGARU. A REED-THROWING MATCH FOR WOMEN, IN HONOUR OF PATIKIPORO. COMPOSED BY TUKA, CIRCA 1815. Two women. Akiakia tute te manava ia Tevoo 'i Strip the branches l off Mini's "kava ' ' tree Ei mana paa no Ngaru Avaiki, To stupefy wonder-working Ngaru, Koia i pau taae ! Victorious over all monsters, Tepoi arire na Moko ra, Pet grandson of Moko, Na Vari-ma-te-takere e ! Descended from Van-origmator-of-allthings. Chorus. Te taa o te rangi The natives of the sky A tuku te ata apai Ngaru e, Let down a trap to catch Ngaru, I te kakenga atu rava. Who ascended on high. Two women. Kake atu Ngaru i te tautua, To save Ngaru the golden lizards I te tau aro o te Moko kura i tau e, Climbed up the front and back, Ka pare nei kia Apai-te-rangi e ! Baffling cruel Apai-te-rangi. Kua kino Ngaru ei te taeke ae ! T'was Ngaru blackened by diving, Chorus. Kua kino Ngaru i te taeke, Ngaru blackened in the billows. E anga turoko ka oro ai Tongatea e ! The sight disgusted the fair Tongan, Tei Itikau te roki Whose loved resort is at Itikau. Two women. Tei Itikau te roki e I Yes ; her loved resort is at Itikau. 1 The root only of the piper-mythisticum is chewed to make the stupefying drink. But Mirds own original plant, of enormous size, in the shades is narcotic even to its branches. The inebriate spirits are helplessly carried to the fatal oven, and are cooked. Ngaru alone defeats her cruel arts. Adventures in Spirit-World. 239 Chorus. Papa paka, a inu ra i te vai o Mania, Refresh yourselves, fair ones, in Shady-Land, E rua enua e pei ai te pel Like celestials proficient in ball throwing. INUINU TAI. Pei ikiiki na Ngaru e ! FIRST OFFSHOOT. Two women. Oh ! the wondrous skill of Ngaru. Chorus. Tera rava te karanga, E karanga ia Ngaru. Iti mai rapa te uira, E uira tu akarere, Na mana o Ngaru-tai. Noea toou mana ? No raro i Avaiki, Na Vari-ma-te-takere, Na ooki atu na, Tena la ia kava. E tere aa ra, e Mini ? E tere kai tangata ! List to yonder voice ! 'Tis addressed to Ngaru. Lightning is emitted from his person, And flashes all around. Great is the might of Ocean-loving Ngaru. 1 Whence this unheard of power ? From the depths of spirit-land, From Vari-originator-of-allthings, Who sends him back again (to this world). Ah ! there comes the stupefying draught. What have you come for, Mini? I come to devour mankind. Two women. Takina ra Avaiki, e Miru e 1 Do thy worst, Muni ! Ei rapanga uira i tane. Chorus. Provoke not the flashing lightning of your betrothed 1 Ngaru SB wave : a play on the name is intended, as well as a reference to his first exploit. 240 Myths and Songs. Two women. Tone oro ki Iti I 1 The betrothed, whose loved resort is at Itikau Chorus. Ae, Ngaru-tai. Aye, Ocean-loving Ngaru. Two women. Akiakia tute te manava ia Tevoo 'i, Strip the branches off Mini's kava tree, Ei mana paa no Ngaru Avaiki, To stupefy wonder-working Ngaru, Koia i pau taae f Victorious over all monsters. Tepoi arire na Moko ra, Pet grandson of Moko, Na Vari-ma-te-takere e I Descended from Vari-originator-ofall-things. Ctiorus. Te taa o te raugi The natives of the sky A tuku i te ata apai Ngaru e, Let down a trap to catch Ngaru, I te kakenga atu rava. Who ascended on high. Two women. Kake atu Ngaru i te tautua To save Ngaru the golden lizards I te tau aro o te moko kura i tau e, Climbed up the front and back, A pare nei kia Apai-te-rangi-e 1 Baffling cruel Apai-te-rangi. Kua kino Ngaru e i te taeke ae ! 'Twas Ngaru blackened by diving, Chorus. Kua kino Ngaru i te taeke, Ngaru blackened in the billows : E anga turoko ka oro ai Tongatea e, The sight disgusted the fair Tongan, Tei Itikau te roki. Whose loved resort is at Itikau. Two 'women. Tei Itikau te roki e I Yes ; her loved resort is at Itikau. 1 ** Iti," an abbreviation for " Itikau," the name of a famous resort for lovers on the west of the island. Adventures in Spirit-World. 241 Chorus. Papa paka, a inu ra i te vai o Mama. Refresh yourselves, fair ones, in Shady-Land, E rua enua i pei i te pei. INUINU RUA. O Mama tai o are e 1 Takina o Ngaru-tai Na Kumutonga i apai, E apai ki Avaiki, Ei kai na Miru-Kura, Ei tane Ngaru tai Akiakia tute, akiakia kava, Te manava ia Tevoo. Tataia e Iva, porotua te rangi ra. Kakea ra e Ngaru te enua Taumareva, te enua iri kura e, Na te taa o te rangi. E tere aa ra, e Miru ? E tere kai tangata. Takina ra Avaiki, e Miru e ! E rapanga uira i tane Tane oro ki Iti 1 Ae, Ngaru-tai. Like celestials proficient in ball-throwing. SECOND OFFSHOOT. Two women. In Shady-Land is thy true home. Chorus. Lift up Ocean-loving Ngaru ; Eaimutonga shall bear thee on Until thou reach spirit-land As food for the ever-ruddy Miru Our betrothed Ocean-loving Ngaru. Strip the branches off" the "kava" tree, To stupefy thy senses. The heavens are black torrents descend. But Ngaru passes on to Taumareva The land of scarlet garments, At the edge of the skies. What have you come for, Miru ? I come to devour mankind. Two women. Do thy worst, Miru ! Chorus. Provoke not the flashing lightning of your betrothed Two women. The betrothed, whose loved resort is at Itikau. Chorus. Aye, Ocean-loving Ngaru. 242 Myths and Songs. Two women. Akiakia tute te manava ia Tevoo J i, Strip the branches off Mini's "kava" tree, Ei mana paa no Ngaru Avaiki, Koia i pau taae ! Oi au tiria, tiria. Oi au tara, tara, Taraia akera, Kia kite au i teia maunga. O te maunga poro oa teia A tau tupuna a Moko-Roa, Tau metua a Vaiare, Tau vaine a Tongatea. To stupefy wonder-working Ngaru, Victorious over all monsters. Chorus, Put me down, put me down. Set me free, set me free. Oh, that I had liberty To gaze at this mountain ! 'Tis surely the mountain spoken of By my grandfather "The-longLizard," And by my mother Vaiare, And by my wife, ** The-fair-Tongan. " Kiritia kai e kinana ! To koivi, vaio i Erangi maunga ! To vaerua, e kave i te po Na to maua metua na Mini ! Thou shalt be forthwith devoured ! Thy body shall rot on this " Heavenly Mountain " Thy spirit shall be borne to the shades, To furnish a repast for our mother Mini. Kumutonga, Karaia-i-te-ata 6i, Tukua maira ta korua tane, Kua roa oa te umu a Mini ! Hist, Kumutonga ! Hist, Karaia-theShadowy, Bring me your intended husband, For the oven of Mini is waiting ! Aore a e pau atu i tau moko ; E tapu te tikinga vaine a Ngaru I will not part with my grandson. 'Tis thus ye fairies treat Nganu Tuku atu te taura i Enua-Kura. E taura viriviri, e taura varavara, Pray drop down some cords to SpiritLand; Ropes of many strands and of great strength, Adventures in Spirit-World. 243 Ruia e tematangi, kakea e Ngaru, Kakea e te rangi tautua, Kakea e te rangi tuamano. Swaying to and fro in the breeze, yet able To bear Ngaru, the heaven-climber, Resolved to explore all nature. E tuku te taura i Enua-Kura e ! Mauria ! Pray, drop down some cords to SpiritLand. Hold fast (Great emphasis^ Mauria, e Ruateatonga, Te pitonga i te taura I tukua J i i maua ariki. O Raka maumau e 1 Tukua, tukua ra ikdna ! Spirit of the shades 1 hold fast To the end of these ropes, Intended to rescue our favourite From all-devouring " Auraka," Drop, drop them down at once ! Oki mai, e Ngaru ! Tera 'tu te umu e tao iaau ! Hasten back, Ngaru ! Yonder is the oven intended to consume you. This curious drama was performed at Tamarua by daylight, at the base of the hill Vivitaunoa. Several women still living took part in the performance. One was named Mini for the occasion ; a second Moko; a third Ngaru. Two others represented the daughters of Miru Kumutonga and Karaia-i-te-ata. These fairies, at the proper time, carried over the crest of the hill a large bundle like a seeming corpse, ready to be thrown down " Auraka," the last resting-place of the dead. An oven was made, but no fire lighted. Two cords were fastened to the woman who sustained the part of Ngaru, and who was dragged to the edge of the supposed oven. The husband of Patikiporo is still living. He has for many years sustained a good Christian profession. The part commencing "Put me down," etc., down to "a 244 Myths and Songs. repast for our mother Mini," is taken from the myth, which is known to be of great antiquity. Sadaraka well recollects the performance, at which, as a male, he could only be a spectator.