THE BALL-THROWER'S SONG; OR, THE FAIRIES BEATEN BY NGARU. FOR THE FETE OF POTIKI, Call for the dance to lead off. Pei ikiiki tei to rima, e rua toe, Keep the balls all going 5 two are left, Tei Iva e | a tai ra koe. In all spirit-land thou hast no equal. Solo. Taipo e ! Go on \ Chorus. Pei aea nga Tapairu no Avaiki ; Here are fairy players from netherland, No nunga paa i te rangi e ! As well as natives of the sky. Solo. Ae e ! Aye ! Chorus. Pei aea i te pei itu, i te pei varu, e Ina alone keeps seven, yea, eight Ina e ! balls in motion. Ka re koia o Matonga-iti. kau rere. Little Matonga is beaten utterly beaten. Solo. Ka re oki, e Matonga e, i te pei Ah ! Matonga, thou art beaten Ka topa i to rima ; a tai o ! At the outset a ball has fallen to the ground. INUINU TAI. FIRST OFFSHOOT. Solo. Tiria mai taku pei. Give me the balls. Adventures in Spirit-World. 245 Chorus. E pel ka topa i te rima o nga tupuna This art was taught me by the gods, x Na Teiiri na Teraranga. By Teiiri and Teraranga. 1 Taku rima, taku ei kapara turina, Encircled with chaplets of laurel, Ua toro, pati kura konikoni, I select round scarlet fruits No nunga no te akinga pei To serve as balls for our game, O nga Tapairu, tu tai e, kin rua e, For fairy women who once and again Paiereiere ikitia i raro o Kaputai. Have come up from spirit-world to dance at ELaputai. 2 A tai nei vaine i nginingini ai, Of these fairies the most strangely fascinating I toro pa titi, toro pa tata, And proficient at our game is Ina. te pua mata reka, o te akatu nga Lovely blossom, whose home is in are the sky, 1 ikitia i Marama Nui e. Era koe, Beloved wife of Full-Moon, I have e Ina ! beaten thee ! Solo. Taipo e ! Go on ! Chorus. Pei aea nga Tapairu no Avaiki ; Here are fairy players from nether land, No nunga paa i te rangi e ! As well as natives of the sky. Solo. Ae e ! Aye ! Chorus. Pei aea i te pei itu, i te pei varu, e Ina alone keeps seven, yea, eight balls Ina e ! in motion. Ka re koia o Matonga-iti kau rere : Little Matonga is beaten utterly beaten. 1 Gods presiding over the game of ball-throwing. 3 The shore-king's residence, close by the altar of Kongo. 246 Myths and Songs. Solo. Ka re oki e Matonga e i te pel Ah ! Matonga thou art beaten Ka topa i to rima ; a tai 6 ! At the outset a ball has fallen to the ground. INITINU RUA. SECOND OFFSHOOT. Solo. Tei nunga ! How high ! Chorus, I nunga o pel tini, i raro o taaonga. All the balls in the air ; how dexterous the hand ! To kura pel kura, maautara, The balls are all red and greatly admired. Mea Auraka te metua, e nui ana, Thanks to the divinities who taught thee, E mau ana, peiia, tuia te toa i Rangi Catch them, throw them in succesriri. sion. Anga mai te vai ia mata. All eyes are fixed on thee. E vai tuaine, e vai tnngane, Women and men in wonder Riu atu to tau, anga mai to oro, Gaze at thy face and form. Teia taku pei, e pei ikiiki Marama With these balls again I challenge rua e ! you fairies. Era koe, e Matonga ! I have beaten thee, too, Matonga ! Call the second. Pei ikiiki tei to rima, e rua toe. Keep the balls all going ; two are left. Tei Iva e, a tai ra koe e ! In all spirit-land thou hast no equal. Solo. Taipo e ! Go on ! Chorus. Pei aea nga Tapairu no Avaiki ; Here are fairy players from netherland, No nunga paa i te rangi e ! As well as natives of the sky. Solo. Ae! Aye! Adventures in Spirit-World. 247 Chorus. Pei aea i te pel itu, i te pel varu, e Ina alone keeps seven, yea, eight balls Ina e ! in motion. Ka re koia o Matonga-iti kau rere ! Little Matonga is beaten utterly beaten. Ka re old, e Matonga e, i te pei, Ka topa i to rima ; a tai o ! Solo. Ah 1 Matonga, thou art beaten. At the outset a ball has fallen to the ground. INUINU TORU. A tail THIRD OFFSHOOT. Solo. Again! Chorus. Tai, ma, torn, a, rima, ono, itu, varu. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight balls ! Tu akarongo no Pai, no Manoinoi ariki Pai and the royal Manoinoi admire. E tangi te vai i Aratatia. The crowd is astonished. Akairi i nunga i Aramaunga i te Akaina, though skilled in all arts, kopuku. Aakina i te maro Akaina, Na tumaanga nginingini i te rearea, E tangata e tu i Torea, Surpassing the men of his day, The bravest and wisest of men, Ne'er could equal thee. E mania i te kura, e mania i te rearea ! Let perfect silence now be preserved. Again I have beaten thee, Ina ! Era koe, e Ina ! Taipoe! Pei aea nga Tapairu no Avaiki ; No nunga paa i te rangi e ! Aee! Solo. Go on! Chorus. Here are fairy players from nether land, As well as natives of the sky. Solo. Aye! 248 Myths and Songs. Chorus. Pei aea i te pei itu, i te pel varu, e Ina alone keeps seven, yea, eight balls Ina e ! in motion, Ka re koia o Matonga-iti kau rere. Little Matonga is beaten utterly beaten. Solo. Ka re oki, e Matonga e, i te pei, Ah ! Matonga, thou art beaten, Ka topa i to rima ; a tai 6 ! At the outset a baU has fallen to the ground. INUINU A. FOURTH OFFSHOOT. Solo. E retia ! Avaunt ! E retia e retia Tua-minii Avaunt, avaunt, thou of a scraggy back! Chorus. E retia, e retia Tua-ara-roa ! Avaunt, avaunt, thou of the long spine Ara-roa i te iki-tanga i te akamatenga. Tall to deformity and ready to die. Na kura pei kura, na tama reionga, Give me my grand scarlet-balls, Na kakara onu e rutu i te tua o Vatea. Like young turtle in the palm of Vatea. Re tai, rerua, re toru, re a, Beaten once, twice, thrice, yea, four times ; Re rima, re ono, re itu, re varu, Beaten again, again, and again ; Re iva, re ngauru, tinitini, manomano. Beaten times innumerable, all of you. O Arauru, O Ara peipei, tei kai te Pack up your traps, one and all reinga. Koi tangatanga iri, koi mata kerekere, Ye sweet-scented ball-players from the skies Koi nunga, koi raro, koi te patiu e ! And from nether-land and be offl Era koe, e Matonga ! Again I have beaten thee, Matonga. Third Catt. Pei ikiiki tei to rima, e rua toe. Keep the balls all going ; two are left. Tei Iva e, a tai ra koe e ! In all spirit-land thou hast no equal Adventures in Spirit-World. 249 Solo. Taipo e ! Go on ! Chorus. Pei aea nga Tapairu no Avaiki ; Here are fairies from nether-land, No nunga paa i te rangi e ! As well as natives of the sky. Solo. Aee! Aye! Chorus. Pei aea i te pei itu, i te pel varu, e Ina alone keeps seven, yea, eight balls Ina e ! in motion. Ka re koia o Matonga-iti kau rere ! Little Matonga is beaten utterly beaten. Solo. Ka re oki, e Matonga e, i te pei, Ah 1 Matonga, thou art beaten. Ka topa i to rima ; a tai o ! At the outset a ball has fallen to the ground. MAUTU. CONCLUSION. Fourth Call. E ara pei na Kumutonga, And now a game of ball-throwing with Kumutonga, Na Karaia-i-te-ata e, a kake e ! With Karaia the shadowy from nether-world. Solo. Taipo el Go on ! Chorus. Te pei maira te peinga i te ata, Play as ye are wont in the shades. Solo. Aee! Aye! Chorus. Te rere maira te manu pepe kura. A bird of gay plumage is watching you. 250 Myths and Songs. Solo. E ara pel oki ra na Karaia ae e 1 A game of ball-throwing with Karaia ! Chorus. E ara pei na ELumutonga, A game of ball-throwing with Kunmtonga Na Karaia-i-te-ata. And her sister Karaia-the-shadowy. Aore paa e kitea te Ikonga i te rima ! The quick movements of the fingers are invisible. Of the sky-fairies, Ina and Matonga were the most clever at this game. Both, however^ are vanquished by Ngaru : in the first and third stanzas Ina is beaten; in the second and fourth, Matonga. In the "conclusion" Ngaru is trying his fortune with the infernal sirens with equal success. In the dance the performers imitated the movements of the ball-throwers, without balls, however. The contemptuous language of the fourth stanza is in direct contradiction of the standard belief in their " peerless " beauty. It is a sly hit at certain ladies at the dance personifying the two sets of fairy women. Proud of their assumed name, " Tapairu," they are really the butt of the whole assembly. A JOURNEY TO THE INVISIBLE WORLD. A TAHITIAN MYTH. Ouri bare Oem& two sons, of whom Arii was the elder, and Tavai the younger. On one occasion, for a trivial offence, some of the father's relatives severely beat little Tavai, who was his mother's pet Ouri was so enraged at this, that her husband Oema Adventures in Spirit-World. 251 descended to Hawaii to hide his shame. The now regretful wife waited many days in vain for his return. Little Tavai, who was naturally a brave child, resolved to go in search of his father. On mentioning his intention to his mother and older brother, the former strongly objected, whilst the latter volunteered to accompany him. Said Tavai to Arii, " Stay to take care of our mother." But Arii would on no account consent to be left behind by his younger brother. The mother, finding it impossible to detain her beloved children, disclosed to them the secret road to spirit-land, and taught them the needful formula. Using this charm, the earth clave asunder, and the lads descended They now found themselves in the land of Kui-theBlind. Arii was excessively alarmed at her appearance, and confessed his fears to his younger brother, who only remarked, "I told you not to come, but you would have your own way." Now Kui was employed in cooking her daily oven when the brothers approached her and in silence watched her operations. Kui did not suspect the presence of these intruders. The food in her oven consisted of : 2 heads of taro. 2 plantains, 2 halves of bread-fruit. 2 packages of sour bread-fruit paste. Laying on a goodly pile of leaves, she covered in her oven and pressed it down with large stones. Kui now sat quietly inside her house till it was done, still ignorant of the presence of mortals. When she judged the food to be sufficiently cooked, she opened her oven. She took up a taro and placed it in her basket On putting out her arm to take up the second lo, it was gone ! 252 Myths and Songs. Kui was greatly surprised, but did not speak. She thought, " What daring fellow has invaded my land and come to steal my food ? " Kui next took up a plantain and put it into her basket. But on seeking for the second lo, it was gone ! And thus, too, of the bread-fruit and the packages of sour bread-fruit paste. The old blind woman, now thoroughly enraged, exclaimed, " Whoever this is that has dared to come to my land, I mil devour him? She then re-entered her house, carrying the diminished supply of food. Tavai whispered to his elder brother, " Beware of her tricks : touch nothing belonging to her." At this moment Kuithe-Blind came out, armed with a terrible fish-hook fastened to a long line. This she swung backwards and forwards, all the while chanting a song, in order to catch the thief. The lads contrived to keep clear of it, but threw a pandanus log at it The log was hooked. Whilst Kui was pulling in her line with immense satisfaction, the boys chanted these words : Carefully secure thy fish, Ere thou be o'ertaken by a shark. To which Kui replied : For him that is caught by my hook There is no hope. Strong is my hook. Its name is (" Furnisher of) food for immortals." The line is called " The indivisible." Kui seized her supposed victim, which proved to be a mere log of wood. Angry at this, she again threw out her dreadful fish-hook. This time she caught the elder boy Aril Both the brothers wept bitterly. Kui again chanted the former ominous words, "For him/' etc. When the youthful victim had almost arrived at the doorway where the cruel blind woman sat, the brave Tavai ran forwards, and seizing the fatal string snapped it asunder by sheer Advent^l,res in SpiritWorld. 253 force, thus rescuing Arii from her pitiless clutches. The brothers then entered the house of the now defenceless Kui, and discovering the stone axe with which she was accustomed to despatch her victims, slew her therewith. Her body was next chopped in pieces ; the house pulled down and set on fire, thus consuming this foe of mankind. Tavai now proposed that they should resume the search for their father, and that Arii, as the elder, should take the lead. The brothers accordingly prepared to leave the land of Kuithe-Blind. Arrived at the sea-shore, they walked over the ocean and saw a red streak ahead on the surface of the water. On drawing nearer to the red streak, they found a red shark swimming underneath. Arii trembled and entreated Tavai to go in front As the younger brother sturdily refused, Arii had still to go on. The great red shark now rose to the surface, and said : O era taata e aere Yon daring travellers Na raro i te moana ra e ! O'er the briny sea Keinga korua e au ! Shall furnish my repast. These words struck both lads with terror, but Tavai, recollecting himself, replied : Art not thou our aged ancestor, Nutaravaivaria ? And are not we The offspring of Oema and Ouri ? The enormous fish now learning that these boys were his own grandchildren, allowed them to get on his back, and conveyed them safely to the shore of Rauai'a-Nui, where Tavai landed The red shark now asked Tavai to give him Arii to eat. But the brave boy said, "You must not devour him, for I have but one 254 Myths and Songs. brother." Three times did the red shark ask for Arii : three times was the request denied by Tavai. Now there was a great abundance of cocoa-nuts in this new land. Tavai climbed the trees and gathered the nuts, so that the ground was everywhere covered with the fallen nuts. Tavai's next work was to tie these nuts together in fours and count them. In all there were a thousand nuts, which he with no little labour placed on the back of the great red shark. And not until the last four was given up did the shark give up his brother. Arii and Tavai spent three days on that island. On the morning of the fourth day the red shark came back. The lads again mounted on his back and were borne over the ocean in search of their lost father. Now the boys had provided themselves with cocoa-nuts to eat by the way. All but one had been disposed of during their long voyage. At their wits' end to know how to open it, they broke it on the head of the shark. Pained by the smart blow, the red shark dived down to the bottom of the ocean, leaving the boys swimming on the surface. When at length the strength of Arii was exhausted, the red shark again rose to the surface, and generously forgiving the late offence, carried them to shore. This is the farthest limit of spirit-land. The brothers now travelled about in search of the inhabitants. They fell in with a man who asked what they were in quest of. They told him that they were seeking for their father, and inquired whether he could give them any intelligence respecting him. The old man advised them to apply to the oracle. Tavai at once started off to the residence of the famous priest. Without ceremony they opened the door and entered. The priest sharply asked "What stranger is this that has dared to come to my land?" Tavai, annoyed at this brusque reception, struck the priest on his head, Adventures in Spirit-World. 255 causing him to writhe in agony. Having thus humbled the priest, he asked him where Oema was. The priest replied, "Yonder he is dead. Go on until you meet an old woman she has charge of the corpse." At length they met an aged woman, and inquired where the dead body of Oema was deposited. She promptly replied, " In the 'stercus' hole." The brothers said, "Go, then, and fetch it." They closely followed the old hag. On coming to the place, they found that he had long been dead, for only the skeleton remained. They tenderly took up the bones and wrapped them in a mat. They next killed the old woman, and burnt down her house. Not satisfied with this, they slew the priest and the first person they had met, and set fire to their dwellings. Finally, these brave boys, Arii and Tavai, made their way back to this upper world, bringing to Ouri the bones of her long-lost husband. In doing this they traversed the old road, the chasm opening up again as the words taught by their wise-hearted mother were uttered by Tavai. Compare this with the myths entitled, " A Bachelor God in Search of a Wife," and "The Wisdom of Manihiki." "Kui-theBlind " figures in all three versions of their ancient faith. 256 Myths and Songs. CHAPTER XL FAIRY MEN AND WOMEN. TAPAIRU; OR, FAIRY WOMEN AND MEN. THE deformed and ugly Mini has her home in the nether-world, where she cooks human spirits in her oven. Her son Tautiti presides over the dance called by his name. 1 Besides Tautiti, the pitiless spirit-eater has four daughters, called Tapairu, or peerless ones, on account of their matchless beauty. They delight to make their appearance in this upper world whenever a dance is performed in honour of their brother. Thus, if a dance took place anywhere in the northern half of the island, they would be sure to make their appearance that evening at sunset, bathing at a little shady stream named Auparu (= soft-dew). These fairies would then climb the almost perpendicular hill overlooking the fountain, in order to dry themselves and to arrange their beautiful tresses in the moonbeams, ere proceeding to witness the 1 The graceful "Tautiti" dance stands opposed to the " Crab," in which the side movements of that fish are most disagreeably imitated. Dances always took place by moonlight Fairy Men and Women. 257 performances of mortals. But if the dance were to take place in the southern part of the island, these " peerless ones " would make their appearance at two little streams, named Vaipau and Vaikaute, and then perform their usual toilet on the crest of the neighbouring hill. These fairies, always associated with the worship of Tane, would even deign to take part in the dance, provided that one end of the dancing ground were well covered with fresh cut banana leaves. But after merrily tripping it over these exquisitely fragile leaves through the livelong night, not one of them would be in any degree soiled or injured. As soon as the morning star rose they disappeared, and returned to their gloomy home in Avaiki. Throughout the eastern Pacific islands " Tapairu," or " fairest of the fair," is a favourite name for girls. The names of these fairies are : 1. Kumutonga-i-te-po == Kumutonga-of-the-night. 2. Karaia-i-te-ata = Karaia-the-shadowy. 3. Te-rauara = Pandanus-leaf. 4. Te-poro = Point. A SONG IN HONOUR OF MAUAPA. BY PANGEMIRO, LORD OF MANGA! A, CIRCA 1816. Turina eia ra e te Aumania ra, Red necklaces for Mauapa, Kia turuki te vaine moe atu te tone o, To win the favour of the fair, Na te ei papa kura. Mixed with leaves of purple hue. Riro i Motuenga i te puku On the mountains sit we down Maunga ra i akamac te maire, To interweave beautiful flowers Taki rua o ran 1C liarc lapu. With double rows of myrtle 258 Myths and Songs. Tangi atu an ra i te aunga tiere. I love the fragrance of the flowers Tei Aupara na vaine tau nongonongo At Auparu, from fairy women I te pa etu na Ina e ! Arraying themselves by starlight, Te aiai a Kura ! Eu e 1 Ae ! Whilst Ina in the moon looks on. To are karioi e Tekura-i-Tanoa. Ah ! ye e'en surpass Tekura-of-Tanoa In each valley of this island are crevices in the soil, through which superfluous waters drain. The direct road to spirit-land, through Tiki's chasm, having long since been closed, fairies avail themselves of these narrow passages to climb up from time to time, in order to be present at the dances of mortals. The f(te of Terangai, ancestor of the present tribe of Tane, was specially honoured by fairy visitors. The fte came off at Butoa. Teporo and Terauara, fair daughters of Mini, availed themselves of the gorge just by, to come up out of nether-world to take part in the festivity. The sound of the great drum used on that occasion reached to the very depths of spirit-land, inducing four other fairies usually said to be males, and, of course, connected with Mini also to climb up to witness their favourite dance, Tautiti. Oroiti x and Teauotangaroa 2 came up at a gorge known as Tuaoruku, on the south. Marangaitaiti 3 got up through a disagreeable-looking hole on the west, Marangaitaao < through a gorge at the north of the island. Guided by the sound of the drum, these four male fairy visitors tripped along different mountain ridges, until they all met at the fte ground, conspicuous by their unearthly beauty. At dawn they disappeared in the depths of Avaiki through the various crevices. To this myth the prologue to Potiki's fte-songs alludes. After years of anarchy and bloodshed, peace was proclaimed in the name 1 Oroiti = slow-footed. * Teauotangaroa = rn&n-ofTangaroa . 3 Marangaitaiti = gentle-east-wind. 4 Marangaitaao <=* fient-eastevind. Fairy Men and Women. 259 of the gods. At this, the first fte inaugurating the era of peace, it is hoped the fairies will be present as at Terangai's. The greater gods, whose jealousies occasion the wars of mortals, should be chained. PROLOGUE TO THE DRAMATIC FETE OF POTIKI ON HIS ASSUMPTION OF THE TEMPORAL SOVEREIGNTY, CIRCA 1790. Solo. Vaia te rua i Avaiki, Open the entrance to spirit-world, Kia kake mai Oroiti e Tane oi ! That Oroiti and Tane may come up. Chonis. Tircia Tautiti, On this merry night Kia aka i Onemakenukenu. The ghosts are dancing on the smooth sward ; Tane ao i te lua o Teiangai. As at Terangai's famed fete of old. Solo. Te moko ia Tautiti e ! Tane is the patron of dancing. Kaieia! (War dance). Tukua, tukua e ! Down with your burdens, 1 Tukua ki raro. Down with them and rest. 1 Each fete has its distinctive symbolism. In Captain Cook's song, " caulking " is appropriately introduced : in this the employments of peace, as contrasting with those of war. The "burdens" were bundles of long bamboos, suitable for fishing-rods. These furnished employment for men in time of peace. "The cloth-beating mallet" was intended to illustrate the woik of industrious wives. This could not be pursued with safety in time of war, as the far-reaching sounds would only guide the murderer to his prey. At this fte, however, men beat mimic cloth-boards. These fairies* were acted one coming from either end, met in the middle. 260 Myths and Songs. Chorus. E ngae pu Avaiki i te papa, Spirit-land is stirred to its very depths E tukia ma te kaara. At the music of the great drum. Kua mau mai nei Teporo ma Terauara. The fairies Teporo and Terauara have come up. Takaia te papa i maui ; Lead off the dance, ye of the left ; Rumakina te papa i katavu And you, too, of the right. Eeratetaua iTuaoruku At Tuaoruku is a fairy dancingground, Na Oroiti, na Teauotangaroa, For Oroiti and Teauotangaroa, Kimi pou enua ke atu. Who have dared to come up to this world. Solo. Ka tutu Rongo i te rangi e ! Great Kongo shakes his club. Chorus. No te ike tangi reka e papa i tua. Softly sounds the cloth-beating mallet o'er the sea. Tutua ! Tutua ! Beat away \ Beat away ! Solo. Kano korua kiea ? Whither go ye, fairies ? Chorus, Kano maua a kimi ia Tautiti, We go in search of the pleasing dance, Kua ngaro mai nei. So long disused. Teia. Here it is. Teia te akatu, ma te akarongoiongo, Here are the dancers, the torch-bearers, Ma te matakitaki. And the spectators. Solo. Kano korua kiea ? Whither go ye, fairies ? Chorus. Kano maua a kimi i te mania kapa We follow the merry sounds of dancing ; Kua ana mai nei. Therefore have we come. Fairy Men and Women. 261 Teia. Here it is. Teia te akarongorongo ma te matakiHere are the torch-bearers and the taki. _ spectators. Apaina eretia te anau Atea, Chain up the gods, the offspring of Vatea, Te papa i te itinga e ! That our sport be not spoiled. Apaina! Apaina! Avaunt! Avaunt 1 Tautiti ngarue i Teakarum. Ha! I hear shouts of dances at Butoa! Eia la ! Eia la. (War dance, la! la! twice performed.) Solo. V5ia, e Marangaitaao, te rua i Avaiki. Open up for Marangaitaao an entrance from spirit-land. Chorus. Kikimi mai ! Aere mai ! Search us out, join our throng 1 Solo. Vaia, e Marangaitaiti, te rua i Tipitake! Open up for Marangaitaiti the dark gorge. Chorus. Kikimi mai I Aere mai ! Search us out, join our throng ! Kano korua i Temangarea. To what distant spot are these fairies bound? Pua! Pua! Beat away! Beat away! Ereti ua viriviri, ua varavara, Give me a many-stranded, powerful rope, Ruia e te matangi maira, maira, Waving to and fro in the wind, Ruia e te matangi maira, maira, Waving to and fro in the wind, Kua oro Tautiti i Avaiki Nui ma te To pull up Tautiti and his drum out kaara. of Great Spirit-Land. Teia Marangaitaao te kimi atu nei. Here is the fairy Marangaitaao in search of us. Tutua! Tutua! Beat away! Beat away! Ka apai te tere i mua o te kaara. Let the fairies pass in front of the drum; E taki acre i te uto o Terangai, The fairies who once honoured the f&eofTerangai, I rakoa ! I rakoa I How dazzling I How brave I 262 Myths and Songs. Solo. E uru tupu ariki te apai o te pan e I Now for a war-dance as we bear on this drum. Karela 1 (War dance.) Apai nuku, apai rangi ! Let all take a part ; toss it aloft. Chorus. Tuia uta, tuia tai. Those over yonder ; those near at hand; Tuia i te kapa o Tautiti e te aka nei. Prepare to lead off our fairy dance. Solo. Uakina e Kaukau te papa i TeakaThe dance-loving tribe assembled of ruru, yore Te papa o Terangai. On the lands of Terangai. Chorus. Tatakina te kaara, urikaka. Up with the great drum ; toss it in the air. Solo. Rumakina e Rongoimua, 1 The illustrious Mautara fought Te papa i Pekekura, te papa i te ngaere. And conquered the island for us, his children. Chorus. Vaoo ra ikona tena kaara, Up with this great drum ; toss it in air, Ei poani i te rua i Avaiki. And close up the mouth of spiritworld. Solo. Te miro o te tata koe o ! Come forward, ye players of melodious flutes, Chorus. Tautiti te kapa i Atea. la. In honour of this dance of the gods ! (Shouts.) 1 Mautara's true name was Rongoimua, but it has been entirely dropped in later years in favour of the nickname "Mautara," because he took to the cannibal ways of that outcast. Fairy Men and Women. 263 Call for the dance to lead off. Tanumia Tevoo i Avaiki rangi taea e ! "Mini's own" kava grows in spiritland. Solo. Taipo e ! Go on ! Chorus. Te kava ru au e rupepea. The finest and most intoxicating drink. Solo. Ae e ! Aye I Chorus. E atua nio-renga i Iti, e Tane ! Tane, god with yellow teeth, was once expelled Tahiti, Eaa la manu kai tangata ra e ! Yellow with devouring mankind I Solo. Nai kava kura te kava akiakia 'i Let the red "kava" be carefully plucked, Te tere o turina kake e ! As a draught for dancers in the upper world. Te rangia te kava e no te atua ae e 1 Let .the drink be prepared for the priests. Chorus. Te rangia te kava o te atua. The sacred bowl of the priests is ready. Kia inumia ia pau e i te titara are. To be quaffed only by yon sacred men, Solo. Kiekie toro e ! Is there not yet another sort ? Chorus. E raui tapu e taki na, J Tis too sacred for mortal use. 264 Myths and Songs. Solo. Takina te kava, e vaio te noko The shoots only may we strip off; the parent stem la Tevoo i akamae ana el Is " Minims own," reserved for the destruction of souls. These " Tapairu," or " peerless ones," were sometimes represented as taking up their abode with the sea-side king, who was regarded as being specially under their protection : Te ui a te Tapairu The questionings of the Tapairus A van toe ia Kaputai Who came up at Kaputai Te moea ra te enua marama e ! To sojourn in a land of light After all, these fairies formed one family, known as "fairies from ri&r-world" Ngaru climbed the sky, in his passion for exploring all nature, and discovered a different set of "Tapairus" all fair women. Of these the most celebrated is Ina, wife of the moon, and Little-Matonga. They are known as "fairies of the sky." Like those of nether-world, the heavenly fairies are wondrously skilled in ball-throwing, Ina being able to keep eight balls going at one time, Ngaru learnt the art from the netherfairies in his long residence in their home. So proficient did he become, that he actually beat the nether and the sky fairies at their own game, which he afterwards introduced to this world. Xukia koe tei Apepe Thou wast smitten down at Apepe. Ka aere ra, e Ati, i te enua poiri. Ah, Ati ! thou art bound to the land of darkness. Kua pou au nei, Riuvaka ra, Alas, Riuvaka, I am devoured of the gods, Tai kai e ou te atua, Who have assembled to feast upon me! Te ravea ra e te are Tapairu I was saved by the friendly Taparius TM te flj-a veerua. Who met me on the road. Fairy Men and Women. j 265 THE FAIRY OF THE FOUNTAIN. In Rarotonga, at the pretty village of Aorrangi, is the small fountain of Vaitipi. On the night after full moon, a woman and a man of dazzling white complexion rose up out of the crystal water. When the inhabitants of this world were supposed to be asleep, they came up from the shades to steal taro, plantains, bananas, and cocoa-nuts. All these good things they took back to netherworld to devour raw. Little did the fairies think that they had been seen by mortals, and that a plan was being devised to catch them. A large scoop net of strong cinet was made for this purpose, and constant watch set at the fountain by night. On the first appearance of the new moon they again came up, and, as usual, went off to pillage the plantations. The great net was now carefully outspread at the bottom of the fountain, and then they gave chase to the fanbeings from spirit-world. The fairy girl was the first to reach the fountain, and dived down. She was at once caught in the net, and carried off in triumph. But in replacing the net after the struggle, a small space remained uncovered; through this tiny aperture the male fairy contrived to escape. The lovely captive became the cherished wife of the chief Ati, who now carefully filled up the fountain with great stones, lest his fairy spouse should return to nether-world. They lived very happily together. She was known all over Rarotonga as the "peerless one (Tapairu) of Ati." She got reconciled to the ways of mortals, and grew content with her novel position. In the course of time she became pregnant, and when the period for her delivery had come, she said to her 266 Myths and Songs. husband, "Perform on me the Caesarean operation, and then bury my dead body. But cherish tenderly our child." Ati refused to accede to this proposition, but allowed Nature to take her course, so that the fairy became the living mother of a fair boy. When at length the child had become strong, the mother one day wept bitterly in the presence of her husband. She told him that it was grief at the destruction of all mothers in the shades upon the birth of the first-born. Would he consent to her return thither in order that so cruel a custom should be put an end to? Ati should accompany her. This was agreed upon, and accordingly the great stones were dragged up from the bottom of the fountain. All kinds of vegetable gums were now collected, and the fairy carefully besmeared the entire person of Ati, so as to facilitate his descent to the lower world. Holding firmly the hand of her human husband, the fairy dived to the bottom of the fountain, and nearly reached the entrance to the invisible world. But Ati was so dreadfully exhausted, that out of pity for him she returned. Eve times was this process repeated in vain ! The fair one from spirit-land wept because her husband was not permitted to accompany her ; for only the spirits of the dead and immortals can enter. Sorrowfully embracing each other, the "peerless one" said, " I alone will go to spirit-world to teach what I have learnt from you." At this she again dived down into the clear waters, and was never again seen on earth. Ati went sorrowfully back to his old habitation; and thenceforth their boy was called "Ati-ve'e" Ati-the-forsaken, in memory of his lost fairy mother. He was surpassingly fair, like his mother from spirit-land ; but strangely enough, his descendants are dark, like ordinary mortals. Fairy Men and Women. 267 It is to this lovely fairy woman the old song of the Ati clan alludes : Kua ve'eia te pou emia, She has descended again to spiritworld ! Ka paa 'i te rau atua o Ati e i Vaitipi Men praised the divine being first seen e 1 by Ati at the fountain. Akana tu a kino te inangaro ! But his heart is now filled with grief. Hence the origin of the common name " Tapairu " = feerkss one^ in memory of their fairy ancestress. 268 Myths and Songs.