CHAPTER XII. DEATH-TALKS AND DIRGES. GHOST-KILLING (TA I TE MAURI). UPON the decease of an individual, a messenger (" bird," so called from his swiftness) was sent round the island. Upon reaching the boundary line of each district, he paused to give the war-shout peculiar to these people, adding " So-and-so is dead." Near relatives would start off at once for the house of the deceased, each carrying a present of native cloth. Most of the athletic young men of the entire island on the day following united in a series of mimic battles designated " ta i te mauri," or slaying the ghosts. The district where the corpse lay represented the " mauri," or ghosts. The young men belonging to it early in the morning arrayed themselves as if for battle, and well-armed, started off for the adjoining district, where the young men were drawn up in battle array under the name of " aka-oa," or friends. The wardance performed, the two parties rush together, clashing their spears and wooden swords, as though in right earnest The sufferers in this bloodless conflict were supposed to be malignant spirits, who would thus be deterred from doing further mischief to mortals. Death-Talks and Dirges. 269 The combatants now coalesce, and are collectively called " mauri," or ghosts, and pass on to the third district. Throughout the day their leader carries the sacred " iku kikau," or cocoanut leaf, at the pit of his stomach, like the dead. Arrived at this third village, they find the younger men ready for the friendly conflict, and bearing the name of " aka-oa." " The battle of the ghosts " is again fought, and now with swelling numbers they pass on to the fourth, fifth, and sixth districts. In every case it was supposed that the ghosts were well thrashed. Returning with a really imposing force to the place where the corpse was laid out in state, a feast was given to the brave ghostkillers, and all save near relatives return to their various homes ere nightfall. So similar was this to actual warfare, that it was appropriately named " e teina no te puruki," ie. " a younger brother of war." DEATH-TALKS. The "ghost-fighting " took place immediately after the decease ; the " dirge-proper " months afterwards. The former was common to all ; the latter was reserved for persons of distinction. Sometimes the friends of the illustrious dead preferred a grand tribal gathering for the purpose of reciting songs in their honour. This was called "e tara kakai," or "talk about the devouring? i.e. a " death-talk." For when a person died, it was customary to say, " he was eaten-uf by the gods." A "death-talk," like the festive "kapa," i.e. dance, came off at night : but whilst the other was performed under long booths, the former took place in large houses built for the purpose, and of course well lighted with torches. 270 Myths and Songs, As many as thirty songs, called "tangi," were often prepared for a death-talk. These were the "weeping songs." Each " tangi " was supplemented with a song""designated a " tiau," or "pe'e" proper. Thus, in all, as many as sixty separate songs would be mournfully chanted in honour of the dead. Of course the merit would greatly vary. Each adult male relative must recite a song. If unable to compose one himself, he must pay some one to furnish him with an appropriate song. The warrior chief and poet, Koroa, supplied to different parties ten different songs for one " death-talk." A near relative of the deceased was appointed to start the first " tangi," or " crying-song." At the proper pauses the chorus catches up and carries forward the song. In the "tangi" the weeping is reserved for the close, when the entire assembly abandon themselves to passionate cries and tears. A song of this description invariably begins, " Sing we " (Tio ra). The appropriate "tiau," or " pe'e " proper, follows. "Tiau" means "a slight shower;" and metaphorically, " a partial weeping." The songs relating to Vera and Puvai are, with one exception, "showery" songs. In these the chief mourner was the solo. Whenever, as indicated, the entire assembly took up the strain, the former solo wept loudly until it again became his duty to take up his part in a soft plaintive voice. The accompaniments of this performance were the great wooden drum, called "theawakencr" (kaara), and the harmonicon. Sometimes the "pau" was added The musical instruments were called into use between each song; in the case of the "showery" songs the great drum accompanied the grand chorus. The true accompaniment of the "crying songs" was the passionate weeping of all present Death-Talks and Dirges. 271 The most touching songs were the most admired and the longest remembered. Several months were requisite for the preparations needful for a " death-talk." Not only had the songs and dresses and complexions to be thought of, but a liberal provision of food for the guests. If a person of consequence in the same clan died or was slain within a year or two, the old performance might be repeated with the addition of a few new songs. It was then termed "e veru," or " second-hand." The songs relating to Vera are known as " te kakai ia Vera " = " the death-talk about Vera." So, too, the dirges for Mourua, the friend of Captain Cook, are known as appertaining to "the death-talk about Vaepae," his mother. These are ancient Some of the best modern songs belong to " the death-talk of Arokapiti," whose eldest son was the first to embrace Christianity, which necessarily put an end to this high effort of heathen poetry. EVA, OR DIRGE-PROPER. Some months after the decease of a person of note, funeral games called "eva" were performed in honour of the departed. These entertainments invariably took place by day. Ve'eteni was fabled to have been sent back to life for a day, in order to instruct mankind in the art of mourning, and to institute solemn " eva " in memory of the dead. There are four varieties of the dirge-proper : i. The "eva tapara? or funeral dirge, with blackened faces streaming with gore, shaved heads, and stinking garments. This was a most repulsive exhibition, and well expressed the hopelessness of heathen sorrow. 272 Myths and Songs. 2. The " eva furuki? or war-dirge. For this long spears were made, as if for war; only they were adzed out of orotea (a white, brittle sort of wood), not of fatal iron-wood (casuarina equasitifolia\ The war-dirge for Tuopapa 1 is a famous specimen of this sort. Nearly all the natives of Mangaia were present on that occasion, arranged in two long columns facing each other, with a space of eighty yards between. The performance began with an animated conversation between the leaders of the two squadrons of supposed enemies, as to the grounds for war; to excite a lively interest in what followed. When this is concluded, the person most nearly related to the deceased begins the history of the heroic deeds of the clan by slowly chanting the introductory words. At the appointed pause both companies take up the strain and vigorously carry it forward. The mighty chorus is accompanied by a clashing of spears and all the evolutions of war. At the close of what in writing would be a paragraph a momentary pause takes place ; a new story is introduced by the soft musical voice of the chief mourner, caught up and recited in full chorus by both companies as before. These war-dirges were most carefully elaborated, and embodied the only histories of the past known to these islanders. 3. The "eva toki" or axe-dirge. In this iron-wood axes, not stone, were used ; that is, mimic axes, as the use of stone axes would infallibly end in bloodshed. In this scenic dirge the axes were used to cleave the cruel earth which had swallowed up the dead. Hades (Avaiki) was supposed to be under Mangaia. In cleaving the earth a vain wish was expressed that an opening might be made through which the spirit of the departed might return tears streaming down the cheeks of the performers. 1 Translated by the writer with a number of clan songs, but not yd published. Death-Talks and Dirges. 273 The axe-dirge was appropriate to artisans only, who enjoyed great consideration, seeing that such knowledge was the special gift of the gods. 4. The "eva ta" or crashing-dirge, in which each person belonging to the two supposed armies is furnished with a flat-spear or a wooden sword a fathom long. This differs from the war-dirge in the weapons used and in the style of composition. Reasons are assigned for the anger of the gods as shown in the death of their friends. A sort of comedy generally wound up these performances. The " dirge-proper," dancing-ftes, reed-matches, and " deathtalks," were all comprehended under the general name of " eva," or " amusements " (called by Cook the " heeva "). KARAPONGA'S DIRGE-PROPER (EVA) IN HONOUR OF RURU (CIRCA A.D. 1816). EVA-TOKI, OR AXE-DIRGE. Solo. la Rangi te toki ia Avaiki Sing we of Rangi's axe * from the shades, E Kongo oi I Thou descendant of Rongo I 1 The first house on Mangaia was built by Rauvaru at Tamarua, who slept in it as soon as it was finished, the long thatch ends hanging loosely down. A heavy shower of rain fell, causing the thatch to lie smoothly. Now Rangi greatly admired this new invention of house-building ; but thought he could improve upon what Rauvaru had accomplished. He therefore descended to the shades (Avaiki), to pay a visit to his grandfather Rongo, who presented him with a wonderful axe, the handle and all being of stone in one piece, and withal very sharp. During the rain Rangi came up unobserved 274 Myths and Songs. Tera Tane-mata-ariki, Ei koti i te ua ma te ra, Ei tua i te pa rakau, E mae ai te toki ia Iti. Ie-koko-kok6 ! Era ei tiki i na tumangamanga E noo i te are ! Taumaa Kaukare i te inapoiri, A motu oki 6 ! Kotia aea ia Ruateatonga. Kapitia oki te tiraa i Paataanga 6 ! E tama e ! E Uri e ! Tena te tamaki, Kla rua 'i ia Turanga 6 ! Taamaa te toki ia ake te upoko ! Ie-koko-k6k6 ! Chorus, Here is Tane-of-royal-face, Keen in rain and sunshine, To lay low the loftiest trees. They are felled by the Tahitian axe. (War-dance. ) This axe is to slay the brave When buried in sleep. E'en as Kaukare 2 perished in the night. The fiat went forth I The axe from spirit-land did the deed. Prostrate they all lay on the ground. Alas for thee, eldest son ! They come rushing on. Twice has the god Turanga 3 thus served our clan. Their axes enter the skulls of the victims. (War-dance.) from the shades, and trimmed the thatch of Rauvaru's house all round. Great was the astonishment of the owner in the morning to see what an improvement had been effected by an unseen friend during the peltering storm. The magic-axe of Rangi, named Ruateatonga, became the envy of men and the gods too. When Rangi died, it disappeared for ever, 1 "Tane-of-royal-face" is the name of the axe-god, identified with the clever Mangaian method of securing ordinary stone axes to wooden handles. This valuable knowledge was introduced by Una from Tahiti (or Iti). These axes were equally valuable for felling trees and men ! It is made to stand for the veritable axe which slew Kaukare and others. 2 Ruru died a natural death ; but being on his mother's side descended from Kaukare, an animated description of that warrior's cruel end is introduced, with a natural cry for vengeance which was but too truly answered not long afterwards. 3 The Tongan tribe introduced the iron-wood tree, and first made spears out of its timber. The god " Turanga" (now in the Missionary Museum) is put for the tribe. Death-Talks and Dirges. 275 Tena oa te toki paekaeka a Tinirau. Taraiia i te rangi te upoku o Kae. la totoia, ia tangi a pu te iku o te toora. la tangi kekina, Tuparua te kapu, la motu a uka, la eveeve ua, la kite i te kata. Taina ra ! Taki na te toki ia Iti, Ei koti i te iku o te toora, E puta i tokerau. Taumaa o Te-ariki-takoto-i-vaengamoana, E tae a vai oki te pera o Tutavake o ! This is the axe greatly coveted by the god Tinirau ; Now uplifted against the head of its victim : Irresistible as a blow from the tail of a whale. With a ringing sound Descend on the hapless skull. As unresisting thatch Is trimmed by this axe, Let him feel its keen edge. Slay him ! Lift the famed Tahitian axe, To chop off the tail of the whale Come from some northern sea. Let the shark-god, supreme in the ocean, devour thee, That avenging Tutavake may wade in human blood ! Puruki TongaitL Ua ta Tongaiti. E karonga na Kongo ; E karonga tuturi. Te vaka autu, Te vaka aueke. Kua pau Mangaia oi ! Aue te tamaki e ! 6i ! Aue, ka mate e ! Eaa te puruki ? E toa te puruki Te vaa o Tongaiti Te kai kaka, Tumaeu kura e ! E ati mata tao, Ei taki i te ara toko i te ngaere ! I-iet Ie-koko-koko. The Tongans struck the blow. The Tongans shed thy blood. The war-god is delighted. Shoulder to shoulder they come. Will they prove victorious ? Or are they destined to fail ? The warriors of Mangaia have fallen ! Alas! that fearful night. How dreadful is death 1 With what were they slain ? With iron-wood spears The special teaching of the Tongans. O poisonous wood, Red like human blood, That defies all other weapons, That hurries the greatest chiefs to an untimely grave I (War-dance twice performed.) 276 Myths and Songs. The whole of this dirge, excepting the first two lines, was chorus. This "eva" was performed by his father's clan, and takes precedence of Arokapiti's. AROKAPITI'S DIRGE PROPER (EVA) IN HONOUR OF RURU, (CiRCA A.D. 1816.) EVA TA, OR CRASHING-DIRGE. Solo. la Ruru te toko i te ra 6i ! Hail, Ruru, predestined chiefl Chorus. Tera, e Ruru, te uira vananga ei unui Ruru, the flashing lightning came to fetch thy spin't ! Cut down with a stroke i to manava ! Ruru atia vaie Te kutu i te mangungu e karara i te The crashing thunders of heaven rangi. Tie-koko koko. Vavaia, e Rongo, te rua i te matangi, la katamutamu Avaiki. Koia aea i te kopuvaru. E maiti te pura o Tutavake e rere i erangi. I aa to taumaa, e te rangi maoaoa ? To punanga, e te veri tautua ? salute thee. (War-dance). Great Rongo, cleave an aperture in the horizon, Through which may be heard the whispers of spirit-land. Each (god) wields an octagonal club. Sparks of fiery war fly up to heaven. Why this curse, ye angry skies ? Art thou offended, Centipede, everywhere present ? The enraged Mantis flits over mount Ikurangi. The irate Lizard has arrived from the shades. Ka moe koe, e te karaunga, i Art thou, Earwig, in haste to occupy tona are. the dwelling (of the dead) ? Ka pura te e i Ikurangi, Reia e te moko i Enua-kura. Death-Talks and Dirges. 277 I akaaraia atti koe, e te tukununga. E tu ra koe, e te ueue : To peau, e te manu ka rere. I narea koe e te potipoti I narea koe e te vava E atare kai roro i te kikau. Taumaa to pauru, e te ro ; To komata toto, e te namunamua, Na Tiereua koe e anau. E manu tu e mai koe, e te kereteki, Tokoa e te iva i vaenga moana. I turuanuku koe e Tutavake. I turua mataotaoa te apai o te rangi. Eia e manu e pungaverevere. Ei ei nuku na manu o te rangi, Pirake e piri te papao ! Na tamaroa e tu i te taua, Anaua te tamaroa e Tutavake 6 ! Miru te metua 1 E enua akarere Mangaia. Puputa motu no Tirango, E pa te rongo i Avarua. The ever-watchful Spider is already weaving its web, And the drowsy Beetle is on the move. Each insect is on the wing. Horrid vermin are devouring thee. The Cricket, too, is eating thee up, (In league with) the despoiler of the cocoa-nut palm. A curse upon thy head, O Ant ! And on thee, too, Mosquito, everthirsting for blood : All children of the god Tiereua. Ha ! there is a Grasshopper in the cruel throng, Followed by a Dragon-fly from midocean. Oh that war loving Tutavake would pity thee ! Oh, that the fierce demon of the sky would save thee ! Thou art doomed like a fly in a spider's web ; Snared by the relentless fairies of the air; Helpless as a fish in the meshes of a net. Alas ! brave sons destined for fight, Begotten of war-loving Tutavake, Dread Miru 1 awaits you. Mangaia will soon fade from your sight Even great Tirango was slain, He whose fame reached other lands. 1 As Ruru did not die a warrior's death, his spirit necessarily enters the domains of cruel Miru. 27 8 Myths and Songs. Taevaia e Tane te manavaroa o te The clan of Tane was cut up by the Keanui. shark-worshippers, Oaia te ara puku i tu i Maungarua. Who love to worship on steep Maungarua. A puta koe i te rangi, e Rongo ! Favoured childien of the god Rongo. Oai te tiaki i te are o Tongaiti? Who maintained the ancient fame of the Tongans ? O Teio, a tai. O Tevaki, a rua. Teio, Tevaki, and Tirango, Tirango, a toru. O Paia, ka a. Teuira, ka rima. O Paia, Teuira, and Rarea ; all six Rarea, ka ono. famous warriors. E akaara i te moe o te koromatua They loved to waken the slumbers of i Mangonui the wise man at Mangonui, E tu, e ara ! E tu, e ara (With the words) Get up ! Get up ! E ara na tokorua te papakura. Day would dawn upon these watchers, Ka eva Tane i Tiairi, Ah, Tiairi * is filled with the tribe of Tane. Te tu ra oa Ruaika i Tikura, ua mau Brave Ruaika gaily equipped was te rakei. speared. Na Rerepuka i aae i te tua o TukuRerepuka attacked his foes from tuku, behind, I rauka \ tana taua. And gained a decisive victory. Na makona o Tutavake e tu i te taua, Successful fishermen of the war-god E akaara i te tiraa i te rau tamanu, Avenged him who sleeps under the "tamanu" tree, Tu iora ikona e Kotuku. The fearless Kotuku. Aore e taea teia paepae, This place is henceforth sacred. E paepae tua-manomano. None dare approach. O tai i taeo, o Teiiri o Terarama. Only the fairies may come, Teiiri and Terarama. O tai i taeo, a tai paepae o Rongo. Rongo himself has been here ! Solo. E Ina oi ! E Ina 6i ! Hail, 2 Inal Fair Ina ! 1 Tiairi is the warrior's paradise, in which the clan of Tane is supposed to have a large share, most of them having died a violent death. The reference is introduced to distract attention from the dismal fate of all who fall into the clutches of Mini. 2 This is a sort of comedy. The performers now divide themselves into Death-Talks and Dirges. 279 Ua akia oa to puta vai na, e Ina 1 E Thy fruits are stolen. Alas ! Ina, Ina the moon-goddess. Chorus. A mau ; Tera rava te maoaoa. Catch (the thieves.) The sky is threatening. One half. E kake ra koe, e te unga. O Robber-crab, climb and catch them! Other half. Aua au e kake ;na te irave e kake. I will not climb ; let the " Irave " catch them. One half. E kake ra koe, e te " Irave " O " Irave, " climb and catch them! Other half. Aua au e kake ; na te "Papaka " e I will not climb ; let the " Papaka " kake. catch them. One half. E kake ra koe, e te papaka. O "Papaka," climb and catch them! Other half. Aua au e kake ; na te tupa e kake. I will not climb \ let the " Tupa " catch them. One half. E kake ra koe, e te tupa. O "Tupa," climb and catch them! two bands, alternately addressing each other. At length two men, calling themselves mice, actually climb a pandanus tree well-laden with ripe fruit, and squeak I Showers of nuts are scattered over the performers to their great amusement. The "eva," or "dirge properly so called," was always performed by day; usually in the early morning. The ** irave," "papaka," and "tupa" are well-known varieties of the land-crab. 28 o Myths and Songs. Other half. Aua ail e kake ; ne te karau e kake. I will not climb ; let the tiny crab catch them. One half. E kake ra koe, e te karaii. tiny crab, climb and catch them !"" Other half. Aua au e kake ; na te kiore e kake. I will not climb ; let the mouse catch them. Two. Noai teia ngai ? Who is up there ? Chants. Ake ! Ake ! Keka ! Keka ! ! Tutute ! What noises are these of nibbling Tutute ! ! and crunching Ngengene ! Ngengene ! ! Kaika ! Squeaking and fighting ? Kaika!! Akaruke i te katu ! The hard shells are falling. Pururu te katu a te kiore, te katu a te They are scattered in all directions kiore. by the mice. Tai naku, e Kio ! Tai naku, e O mouse, give me some ! Pray Kio ! give me some ! Tera ake oa te kuriri ! Hark to the song of the birds ! Tikaroa te iroiro. Our amusement is concluded. This dirge was performed by the mother's clan under the direction of Arokapiti. There happened to be thunder and lightning on the day Rum died ; which was, of course, regarded as a celestial compliment to the dying chief. All the minor gods (i.e. reptiles and insects) have resolved tc kill the illustrious Ruru. None of the major gods pitying him, his ghost sorrowfully enters the shades. Death-Talks and Dirges. 281 " BLACKENED-FACE " DIRGE-PROPER FOR ATIROA. BY HIS FATHER KORONEU, CIRCA 1820. Solo. E Pange oi ! e rau raua ia tama. Alas, Pangeivi ! The case is hopeless. Kua tomo te vaka 1 The canoe x is lost ; Chorus. A, aore e tu, e tail atua. Oh, my god (Tane) thou hast failed mel I naau ai kua oki o, Thou didst promise life ; E vaorakau raui naau, Thy worshippers were to be as a forest, Aore tetai e tukua i te urunga piro. To fall only by the axe in battle. Ina tika oki Turanga, Had it been the god Turanga E vaimangaro ra taana ! That liar ! I would not have trusted hint. Parau aore, e kai oki taau. Like him, you are a man-eater I Tapani atura i te koi parara May thy mouth be covered with Kororo-kururu ua 'tu ra. Slush it over and over ! E atua te tangata e oia 1 This god is but a man after all 1 Solo. Tiria i mua, e Kon ! Ei ! Ei ! Plaster him well, friends. Ha t Hal I (Women's shouts). Chorus. Tutae keinga e te tuarangi ! Dung is fit food for such gods ! Kua kau te metua i te ngarau I "We parents are in deep mourning, E ngarau no Tiki. Like that first used by Tiki Ei eva i te tama akaaroa ; We mourn for our beloved first-born. Ei tuveu i te are rangorango, Oh, that one could stir up the gods, Kia ara te tangata mate. And cause the very dead to awake ! E takanga mate no Tutaemaro, Yonder stands thy weeping mother. Te taka ra i One-makenukenu. Thy spirit wanders about One-makenukenu, 1 " The canoe is lost " ~ " The child isdead." 282 Myths and Songs. E kimi i te ara, Kia kitea te ara i keinga J i ! Itia e Ruateatonga te ii I te keremuta o Vatea la amama Avaiki I Ua, e Tiki, i te u tuarangi 1 Aria ! Ua, uaia I K6! To taringa, e Pangeivi ; I kai koe i tad tamaiti na ! Inquiring the reason Why his poor body was devoured (by the gods). Fairy of the axe ! cleave open The secret road to spirit-land ; and Compel Vatea to give up the dead ! Solo. Puff, x Tiki, a puff such as only ghosts can! Chorus. Solo. Wait a moment. (Again I say) puff, puff away ! (Chorus of pretended explosions 1) Chorus. A curse upon thee, priest Pangeivi. Thou hast destroyed my boy. As no one would undertake to compose an atheistic dirge for the angry mourner, Koroneu made his own. It was performed successfully amongst the other more regular dirges for Atiroa. THE FIRST MURDER AND THE FIRST BATTLE. The earlier part of the reign of Rangi was " the golden age " of these people. Children grew up to maturity; men became aged their limbs tottering, their backs curved, and their teeth dropping out, so that they were fed again with the expressed juice of the cocoa-nut, poured into the mouth by means of the leaf of the tiere, or gardenia still, Death had not made its appear1 In Latin, pedite. Death-Talks and Dirges. 283 ance ; and of course war, famine, sickness, and pain were unknown. But this happy state of things did not last. Even during the lifetime of the famous Rangi a mighty change took place. There lived in those days a famous man named Matoetoea. Many had tried to kill him ; but in vain. For as soon as the arms of an adversary were uplifted to strike him, a violent shivering and trembling would seize the limbs of the would-be murderer, so that the weapon would fall to the ground and Matoetoea escape unharmed. Hence the saying in daily use, when any one shivers and his skin becomes rough in consequence, "he has been smitten by Matoetoea " (te kiri o Matoetoea). There lived in spirit-land (Avaiki) a " brave," named Tukaitaua, 1 ever ready to perform the behests of Rongo. Hearing of the marvellous power possessed by Matoetoea, he longed to measure his own strength with one of earth. With this view he came up to this upper world and searched over the island for his foe until he found him. For the first time Matoetoea's power of selfdefence was at fault, and he easily fell under the blows of the redoubtable Tukaitaua. Ngake and Akuru were also slain by this " brave j " in all, three persons were murdered successively on one night by Tukaitaua one from each of the three primitive tribes. Thus death entered into the world (Mangaia). Matoetoea was the first to die a violent death, as Vetini afterwards was the first to die a natural one. Rangi was much grieved at this violent breach, now first made, in his hitherto peaceful domain. He sought everywhere for the unknown murderer ; but to no purpose. He therefore descended to (Avaiki) nether-land, to pay a visit to his grandfather Rongo, as the only possible way of discovering 1 = " He whose delight it is to fight " (tu = stand; kai = wf; tau= battle.} 284 Myths and Songs. the murderer. Upon entering the presence of the great Kongo, he found Matoetoea there, his head and face all covered with blood. Rongo asked Rangi what he had come for. Rangi replied, " To ascertain who murdered Matoetoea." The war-god now inquired, "Have you not seen any new face in the upper world ? " "I have," replied Rangi. " He is the murderer," rejoined Rongo. Rangi, now thirsting for revenge, asked how he, a mortal, could kill Tukaitaua. Rongo said, " Go back to c daylight ; ' you cannot conquer Tukaitaua. /will send some one to punish him." Upon this the king left the shades and returned to his old home in this upper world of light. The war-god kept his word. There lived with him in spiritland another " brave," Tutavake, cousin to the redoubtable Tukaitaua, who represented the elder branch of the family. The father of Tukaitaua was Tavarenga (Deceiving) the parent of Tutavake was Tuatakiri (Entirely-brave). Summoned to the presence of Rongo, Tutavake was ordered to go at once " to daylight" and slay Tukaitaua. "How can I manage it? " asked Tutavake. Rongo directed him to search through the six districts of Mangaia. " And if you cannot then discover him, climb the hills, and you will be sure to find his whereabouts. Only do not attack him early in the morning, for then he is in his full strength ; nor in the evening, for as the shadow lengthens his strength increases. Recollect that as the shadow of morning shortens, Tukaitaua's strength wanes. At mid-day it is at the lowest point Stand erect on a hill in the sun until its rays are vertical ; then go and attack him." Tutavake obeyed. Coming up to "daylight," he found the inhabitants of Auau (Mangaia) crowded together in the interior Death-Talks and Dirges. 285 in terror of the unknown murderer of mankind. For some time he could get no clue to the exact whereabouts of Tukaitaua. He had indeed been seen occasionally performing his wonderful warlike evolutions hitherto unknown to mankind. Ascending a hill (which represents the left heel of the giant " Te-manava-roa ") he espied a small cloud of -dust rising from a spot not far from "thechasm-of-Tiki," by which constant communication was at that time kept up with nether-world. Tutavake cautiously approached the spot, and peered through the dense growth of trees and bush which surrounded the open space cleared by Tukaitaua for spearexercise. There, indeed, was his unconscious foe vigorously fighting the air. Day after day, from dawn to sunset, this was Tutavake's sole delightful employment. On this occasion Tukaitaua was somewhat exhausted, for the sun was vertical. Ever and anon an " ugh " would escape the accomplished warrior, as he failed in some delicate movement Encouraged by these heavy grunts of disappointment, Tutavake, spear in hand, suddenly darted from his hiding-place to the edge of the circle inside which his cousin was practising. The astonished Tukaitaua exclaimed: Ana mai ta Tauatakiri, The son of " Entirely-brave " did not come Kua pakua ta Tavarenga. Until the son of "Deceiving" was exhausted. Yet Tukaitaua did not for a moment cease his spear-practice. His antagonist followed him very adroitly, as he went round and round the great circular area, in order to avoid a hasty meeting. This was in accordance with the instructions of Rongo. Tukaitaua's obvious aim was to close in with his foe as quickly as possible, and to give the death blow. Seven times Tukaitaua wheeled round, but was skilfully avoided by Tutavake. The 286 Myths and Songs. eighth time he made the circuit, it was evident that his strength was much impaired. At this Tutavake suddenly swung round in the opposite direction and dealt the hitherto invincible Tukaitaua a fatal blow on his head. Rangi was delighted that the death of Matoetoea and his friends was thus speedily avenged. Tutavake returned to the shades. But the former peaceful state of things could never be enjoyed again. Blood had been shed; first in sheer wantonness, next in just retribution. Ever since, mankind has been engaged in either aggressive or defensive warfare. Diseases of various kinds followed in the train, and lingering death ; Vetini being the first Hurricanes and famines came, too, into existence. Tukaitaua, when prowling round the island in search of Matoetoea, etc., discovered in the exterior pile of rocks surrounding the fertile interior, a remarkable narrow gorge which runs right round, not unlike a wide road, fenced on either side with imperishable walls of hardened sharp-pointed coral Yet, strangely enough, in this coral large trees and beautiful creepers of different kinds grow luxuriantly. At various points in this natural road round Mangaia, Tukaitaua had cleared the bush and removed the rough loose stones in order to prosecute his favourite pastime : at one time with a long spear ; at another with a doubleedged wooden sword; anon with a curved club ; occasionally with a sling. The inhabitants of the world (Mangaia) contrived to get glimpses of the proceedings of this extraordinary fellow from behind trees or elevated blocks of rock ; without, however, being seen by him. For it was evidently a dangerous thing to go near a native of nether-world possessed of such fearful strength. It was DeathTalks and Dirges. 287 in this furtive manner that mankind first learnt what sort of weapons to make and how to fight with them. This knowledge was very seasonable. For not long afterwards there arrived at Tamarua, on the south of the island, a fleet of canoes of " Tongans-sailing-through-the-skies " (Tongaitiakareva-moana). The leader of this formidable band was the first high-priest of the god Turanga. The secret of his successful navigation was a vast ball of string which he held in his hand during his long voyage, and which was quite exhausted upon their safe arrival on the southern coast of Mangaia, 1 Hence his name, Teab-roa, or The-man-of-the-long-string. In those days the now unruly ocean was smooth as the little lake in Veitatei ; its surface occasionally disturbed with gentle ripples, so that it was the easiest tiling possible to voyage over it at any time and in any direction. But in after ages, ceaseless wars and shedding of blood disturbed the course of the elements, and so gave rise to the fearful storms and cyclones we now suffer from. A battle ensued between these driftaways from Tonga and the original possessors of the soil, who claimed to have come up out of nether-world. This was the first of the forty-two pitched battles which have been fought on Mangaia. This primary conflict took place at Te-rua-noni-anga," or Valley-of-soiL Of this battle it is expressly asserted that as men fell in the ranks of Rangi, their places were immediately filled up by new warriors from the shades ! Sceptical moderns think their places were filled up from a reserve force hidden behind the rocks. However, the result was that the warlike invaders, who had despised the small army oi 1 Until lately was shown the hole in the coral reef where "The-man-of-thelong-string" tied this end of the enormous ball of string ! The bit of rock is now destroyed. 2 88 Myths and Songs. Rangi, and who were sure of securing the entire island to themselves, fled in utter disorder. The numerous names of different points of road across the island to the cave of Tautua, where the remnant took shelter, are but so many memorials of those slain in the pursuit. Of Rangi's victorious force three fell one out of each of the three original tribes. And thus was established the ancient doctrine (ara taonga), that victory and chieftainship of all degrees can only be secured by first shedding the blood of some of the victorious party, so as to secure the favour of Kongo, the arbiter of the destinies of war. In the persons of Rangi and Tiaio, but in no other, the secular and spiritual sovereignties were united. Peace was secured by the offering up on the altar of Rongo a human sacrifice, Vaioeve. Rangi now consented that the unfortunate Tongans should permanently occupy that part of the island where they had so recently landed. The art of war would not, however, have reached perfection but for these Tongan settlers, who had the credit, or discredit, of introducing the iron-wood tree, from the wood of which in after years all weapons of war were manufactured. The settlement of a Tongan colony on the south, and their first conflict with the earlier inhabitants, are historical facts. Thenbravery is universally admitted. The restless character of these Tongans is indicated in the proverb, " A stone-mouth is needed to exhort the Tongans to keep the peace," i.e. lips that never tire. When dealing a death-blow it was sometimes said, " Go, eat the stale food of Tukaitaua ; " the food in question being the club and the spear which Tukaitaua loved so well.