RANGI'S first propitiatory offering to Rongo was a rat laid with great ceremony on the original marae of the god of war. But on descending to the shades to pay a visit to his divine grandfather, Rongo evinced his displeasure by averting his face from Rangi on account of his having been imposed upon with so unworthy a sacrifice. Rangi, who was naturally averse to blood-shedding, now learnt that nothing less than a human sacrifice would give satisfaction. Upon his return to this upper world, Rangi successfully fought his first battle at a spot ever since called " Teruanoninga," or Valley-of-sfoil. In this engagement the newly arrived colony from Tonga received a great check. A fugitive from the battlefield, Vaioeve, was overtaken and slain expressly for sacrifice to the god of War and of Night Vaioeve was \hsfirst human sacrifice ever offered on Mangaia. The place where the victim fell still bears his name. u 290 Myths and Songs. The practice once begun was continued until Christianity put a stop to it for ever. The second human sacrifice was Turuia, first priest of Tane on Mangaia, from Iti (Tahiti). Turuia was slain at the instigation of Tamatapu, during the lifetime of Rangi. The tribe of Tane arrived after the Tongans, and from being first regarded as guests, were devoted by the original lords of the soil who claimed direct descent from the god Rongo to furnish human sacrifices whenever required. The successive priests of Tane, viz. Matariki, Tiroa, and Tepunga, were in after times slain and offered in sacrifice by the older tribe. The martial supremacy of Mautara alone saved Tevaki, the last of that devoted race, and from whom the present tribe of Tane is descended. As human sacrifices were indispensable, Mautara reverted to the original tribe of Tongans (in which Teipe was included), from which Rangi had selected the first human sacrifice. It is mournful to think that almost every member of these families was offered in sacrifice; a few of their number being always reserved, and even cherished, for the express purpose of providing future sacrifices. Later still, the Amai tribe was devoted on account of their complicity in a murder of a chief of the once all-powerful Mautara clan. Thus it became the custom to devote each new band of settlers (with one or two exceptions), on some pretence or other, to the altar. The only tribe never thus treated was the original one who worshipped Rongo and Motoro : the alleged reason being that Rongo would be angry if his own worshippers and so-called children were offered. With perfect consistency, then, it was proposed by the angry heathen, in 1824, to offer up Davida, the first Christian teacher, to the god Rongo. This was with the view of extinguishing Christianity. The plot almost Sacrifices. 291 succeeded. Providentially, a convert named Mauapa x revealed it to Davida, and so set the Christian party on their guard. The following ancient myth refers to the only instance related of stealing away the sacrifice from Kongo's altar ; for it is well known that fish were not offered to that god. His fish 'were human victims. Three varieties of butterflies are indigenous on Mangaia : a large, velvety, purple beauty ; a somewhat smaller one, with red spots ; and a small, unattractive, yellow sort One day Rongo missed from his altar a fine sword-fish (aku) ; it had been stolen by the Lizard-god, Matarau, whose marae is at Aumoana, 2 at Tamarua. Rongo ordered his swift messengers, the birds, to fly to that marae to see whether it was not hidden there. The birds obeyed, and found the stolen sword-fish in the sacred shade of the marae. Hard by, in a gloomy little recess, the Lizard kept constant watch. Now this Lizard had, as its name Matarau implies, two hundred eyes, besides eight heads and eight tails. So that all that the bird-messengers could do was to look on with awe at a distance, from the branches of the sacred trees. They returned to great Rongo, and told what they had seen. They were chided by Rongo, and bidden to return to the grove of the Lizard-god, and endeavour to bring away the " fish " stolen from his altar. The birds returned, and in their zeal venturing too near the cave of the god possessed of two hundred eyes, were all summarily devoured. Several other bird-messengers shared a similar fate. Rongo now commissioned rich velvety butterflies to attempt the rescue ; but they, too, were all snapped up by the Lizard-god. The red butterflies fared no better. At last Rongo, 1 A heathen song in honour of this man is given on p. 257, z = Ocean current. 292 Myths and Songs. at his wits' end, hit upon a notable device to get back his stolen sacrifice : two little yellow butterflies were summoned to his presence, and were directed to a banyan tree growing out of the rocks just over the entrance to the cave where the ever-vigilant Lizard kept watch. Adhering to the inside of two sere yellow leaves, their presence would not be noticed. The trusty little messengers, so utterly insignificant in appearance, easily made their way unnoticed to the banyan tree. All the butterflies and moths of Mangaia hid themselves amongst the leaves in the immediate neighbourhood, in order to render assistance. Rongo now caused the " moio " (w. by N.) wind to blow violently across the island (in a straight line from the grove of Rongo to that of the Lizardgod). Down came a shower of yellow leaves with the two yellow butterflies upon the stolen " fish." Little did the Lizard suspect that two messengers of his rival Rongo were hidden underneath the multitude of leaves which caused his eyes to blink for a moment. The clever little butterflies inwardly chuckled, as success was now certain, for they had seized their prey. And now myriads of butterflies and moths of all sorts and colours came to the aid of then* friends. The ears of the astonished Lizard-god were assailed by the defiant shouts of the war-dance, as the swordfish was borne on the wings of the army of butterflies through the air across the island to the altar of Rongo. With infinite chagrin the Lizard-god helplessly watched the disappearance of his stolen " fish." As they fled they sang : E uru tupu ariki, e ika na Rongo ! Dance in triumph before this (fish) offering to Rongo. E apai e takitaki aere. Lift it on high ; bear it carefully on. "Aumoana" is the ancient marae of the Tongan tribe, to Human Sacrifices. 293 whom Vaioeve belonged. Unquestionably this is an allegorical account of the loss and recovery of Vaioeve, or some other very early victim ; the object being to conceal the fact from the vulgar. That an ambush was formed, and two clever fellows dared the anger of the Lizard-god, in order to recover a stolen sacrifice (or " fish," as it was invariably termed) is very probable. THE DRUM OF PEACE. Upon gaining a decisive victory the leading warrior was proclaimed " temporal lord of Mangaia." The kingly authority was hereditary and distinct from that of the warrior chief: the former representing the spiritual, the other the temporal power. I believe Mangaia to be the only island in the Pacific where this distinction obtained. Kings were "te ara pia o Rongo," i.e. " the mouth-pieces, or priests, of Rongo." As Rongo was the tutelar divinity and the source of all authority, they were invested with tremendous power the temporal lord having to obey, like the multitude, through fear of Rongo's anger. Peace could not be proclaimed or blood spilt lawfully without the consent of the king speaking in the name of the god Rongo. So sacred were their royal persons that no part of their bodies might be tattooed ; they could not take part "in dances or in actual warfare. It sometimes happened that the temporal chief was at enmity with the king of his day. In this case the king would refuse to complete the ceremonies for his formal investiture ; life would remain unsafe ; the soil could not be cultivated, and famine soon followed. This state of misery might endure for years, until the obnoxious chief had in his turn been despatched, and a more agreeable successor fixed upon. All the multitudinous idolatrous 294 Myths and Songs. ceremonies to secure peace would be now easily arranged by the king. Seven distinct journeys would be made round the island by the victorious warriors, who with their women and children had hitherto huddled together in one encampment Fully equipped, as if for battle, they would one day march round the island defiantly, to assert the absolute supremacy of the -winning party. Man, woman, or child crossing their path that day was slain. Subsequent processions were of a more peaceful character, in order to perform idolatrous worship at each of the principal maraes. One of the more interesting of these was the ceremony of spear-breaking, in token of the cessation of war. After a renewed circuit of the island, the warrior chiefs would, with great formality, beat to pieces a number of second-rate spears of various shapes against a great chestnut tree (cut down a year or two since) growing opposite the principal interior marae. Another interesting symbol of peace was the setting up in each principal marae a forked stick, well notched, and called " supports? intimating that the leading men who worshipped there should prove " supports " to the reign of peace now inaugurated. Miniature houses were erected on all these maraes ; each house being a fathom long and well thatched, with a little open door neatly screened with a strip of the best white cloth. These tiny houses were designated " conservators of peace ?; (are ei au). The idea was, that all the gods and all their worshippers should lay aside their animosities and unite in keeping the peace. In the language of those days, the entire assembly of gods form but " one house ; " the great point being that no divinity should feel himself neglected, and so take umbrage, and thus a hole be made through which wind and rain (war and bloodshed) might enter. If all the Human Sacrifices. 295 gods be propitious and united, they form a well-thatched house which no evil can invade. The seventh and most important procession of all was to beat the drum of peace all round the island. But the indispensable preliminary to this was the securing an acceptable offering to Rongo, arbiter of war and peace. A man or woman must be slain, but not needlessly battered, for the express purpose, and laid upon the altar. The victim was first exposed on a platform of pandanuswood in the sacred district of Keia, and opposite to the idolhouse ; hence the name often applied to such, " pange-ara," or " laid-on-a-pandanus-tree." The entire body of victors now assemble in their gayest trappings, and well armed, in front of the victim, whilst "the praying-king" (te ariki karakia) slowly chanted twice the following PRAYER OVER A HUMAN SACRIFICE TO RONGO. 1 E kaura ! ura pia ! Stately, noble priest I Ura vananga, ura turou, Sweet peace, pleasant offering ! Turoua takaia, takaia e mana, Securely fastened and well-tied. Rimarima tangata, angaanga tangata, These human hands and human form, Atia a mana airi a tapu : Devoted to this fate by the gods : Atia te 10, te io no Rongo. Doomed to sacrifice by the god Rongo. O Vatea te auranga moana, Great Vatea is the guardian of the ocean. le rua rau'i au, By him it is ruffled : E rua rua'i toro. By him it is calmed. 1 This prayer, and the "Prayer for Peace" on p. 299, are of unknown antiquity. 296 Myths and Songs. Ka tupu o te toa, Ka rito o te toa, Ka rara o te toa, Ka kokoti o te toa, Ka era o te toa, Ka maikuku o te toa, Ka ngaa o te toa. Tupu akera la uki e toa E maori no taua puruki No taua te arutoa No tupuranga taua, No taua kiea, no taua kiea ! E ti o te maunga o te mateni ; Teniteni te matakeinanga ; Koakoa te matakeinanga I Taua ra i te makitea, I te punanga o te ao. Teniteni te matakeinanga ; Koakoa te matakeinanga ! Here is ironwood of noble growth A most graceful tree, With numerous branches. Fell this ironwood tree ; Divide its trunk ; Split it with wedges, For the making of spears. In every age the iron-wood has yielded Death-dealing spears For the use of wairiors only From time immemorial. And bravely have we wielded them ! The wild l ti root of the hills (was our food). But now we shall enjoy plenty. This day we heartily rejoice. Lately we hid in the rocks The refuge of the conquered. But now we shall enjoy plenty, This day we heartily rejoice. The painfully interesting part of this incantation is lost j the stanzas relating to the division of the lands, when the nose and ears of the victim were cut off and formally presented to the expectant chiefs. The " prayer " only was chanted on this occasion. After a few days the warriors would' again deck themselves in their gayest trappings, and well armed stood in front of the wooden altar. The "praying king," assisted by his friends, now came forward with a large coarse scoop-net of cocoa-nut fibre, used only on such occasions ; and carried off the decayed sacrifice to the pebbly beach at some distance. It was laid this time on a 1 Dracaena terminals* Human Sacrifices* 297 smooth block of sandstone in front of the great national stone idol, Rongo. Hence the name frequently applied to human victims, " ikakaa," or fish caught in the net of Rongo. The incantation slowly chanted at the wooden altar in the interior near the marae of Matoro, god of day, was repeated at the natural stone altar on the shore at the marae of Rongo, god of night (atua po). The " praying king," with a bamboo knife, now cut off the ears of the victim ; the right ear representing the right, or southern^ half of the island ; the left ear representing the left, or northern half. Each ear was then subdivided into as many small portions as might serve to represent the various minor districts (tapere) of each half. The king now demanded, in a loud voice, " Who shall be lord, or warrior-chief, of Mangaia?" According to a private agreement, the leading man amongst the winning tribes rose, and with dignity said, " Ei iaku Mangaia " = " Let me be lord of Mangaia," The entire assembly of warriors, by profound silence, confirmed the appointment. This chief now resumed his seat on the ground ; but to him, as supreme temporal lord, no part of the victim was given. In a prescribed order, the names of all the district-chiefs and landowners were proclaimed, each receiving from the hand of the king a portion of the ears of the victim wrapped up in a ti leaf. The great temporal chief invariably received the first portion, in the inferior capacity of district-chief. These bits of human ears were deposited in the different family maraes. They constituted an investiture to all offices and right to the possession of the soil. Without a human sacrifice there could be no formal possession of dignity or estate. The nose of the victim was the portion of the kings and their recognized assistants. Thus the guardian of, and performer on, the sacred drum of peace had a share. The man who had the 298 Myths and Songs. management of all great feasts, and was supposed to make the food grow, came in for his share of the nose. The " praying king," however, was the great spiritual dignity or pontiff, and as such came in for the best lands, in addition to the daily offerings of food of best quality. And now the famous drum of peace, expressly made for this solemn occasion, would be beaten ; or, strictly speaking, would be heavily struck with the tips of the fingers. A feast occupied the attention of the warriors and chiefs between the presentation of the bits of human ears and the drumming. The performance first ook place on the marae of Rongo ; a procession was now formed of all the victorious tribes, headed by the king and the hereditary drum-beater, who carried the big drum. This object of mysterious reverence was simply part of a tree, dug out at one end with stone adzes j the aperture being covered with a piece of shark's skin. Each relative of the hereditary drum-player carried a small drum, to increase the volume of sound, thus assuring fugitives hiding in the rocks and thickets that better days were dawning. The " praying king," at the head of the procession, chanted in a pleasing tone a prayer for peace to the gods. At a certain point all the males of the kingly families united their voices, and all the drums sent forth their agreeable, although monotonous, accompaniment. I give the exact words from the lips of the aged king, who minutely related to me the whole of the ceremonies connected with the offering of human sacrifices and the drum of peace. For any but kingly voices to recite these " karakia," or " prayers/' would have been to invoke the anger of the gods. Human Sacrifices. 299 PRAYER FOR PEACE. The single voice of the " fraying king." Akiakia Maruata ikitia taku atarau. A bleeding victim has been chosen for our altar, laia ia vaerea te tarutaru enua By it are weeded out the evils of the land O Avaiki mai raro e ! Which spring up from netherworld. All the drums and all the voices. Teimaia rangi maia, rangi vaerea. Let peace begin. May the sky be cloudless ! Teimaia rangi maia, rangi vaerea. Let peace begin. May the sky be cloudless ! Vaerea tai taru ; vaerea. Weed out all evils. Weed them out! Vaerea ; vaerua i to makita, makita. Weed, weed them out ; utterly and for ever ! Makitaria kitaria, kua rangi riri e ! Aye, let each threatening cloud entirely disappear! Upon entering each district the performance began anew. The circuit of the island was made in one day \ the prayer being many times offered. At a certain spot, still marked by three stones, a spear was thrust into the big drum of peace, in token that the work was accomplished. Peace was secured The great drum was hidden away in a certain cave, kept an inviolable secret to this day. So that for each proclamation of peace a new drum (pau) must be dug out No music was ever half so sweet to the ears of the vanquished as the monotonous notes of the drum of peace. By it human life became sacred. Wretches, nearly dead from starvation and terror, hiding in the desolate * 4 raei," now came forth boldly. Everywhere the fertile valleys became again dotted over with the dwellings of the victors and their vassals. These houses might be covered 300 Myths and Songs. with substantial thatch ; for had not the gods in each district been honoured with tiny ones of their own? Thatched houses were not lawful until the drum had been beaten. A miserable shift was made with split cocoa-nut branches. In the hope of winning the favour of the new lords of the soil, the survivors of the beaten tribes brought out from their hiding-places in the rocks fine braided hair ; white shells for the arms, used at dances ; fish-nets of the best quality ; wooden troughs and stone adzes. Some were fortunate in being protected by relatives, who usually allowed their unfortunate friends to retain part of their treasures. Some were avowedly protected to furnish human sacrifices at a future day. The birth of a child by such serfs was regarded with satisfaction by the unfeeling masters. As a rule, the wives of the conquered were the property of the victors. The serfs were expected to fish daily for the benefit of their lords, who generously permitted their dependants to eat the small, inferior fish themselves. A feast was given by the victors to these serfs a public recognition of their safety. This was called " taperu kai." The coral-tree (erythrina coralodendror?), which attracts every eye with its symbolical blood-red flowers, was now formally planted in the valleys in token of peace. This plant is almost imperishable. It was vainly hoped that the reign of peace might be equally enduring. Cocoa-nut trees were also planted all over the island to mark the duration of peace. The only warrior-chiefs under whom peace prevailed long enough for a cocoa-nut tree to bear, were Tuanui, Mautara, Ngara, Potiki, and Pangemiro. Two only of these were long reigns Mautara's, twenty-five years ; Potiki's, about twenty years. The other three certainly did not exceed seven years apiece. Sages praise these five great chieftains for causing peace to prevail so long! Human Sacrifices. 301 Tradition tells of a period when war and bloodshed were unknown. That was in the ^ days of Rangi, before Rarotongan chiefs had taught them to be cruel Thanks be to God, that for more than forty years, under the benign influence of Christian truth, human life has been sacred. After the drum of peace had been beaten, it became unlawful to carry weapons of any description. Aged men, however, were permitted to carry about a staff, five or six feet in length, to support their tottering limbs. Men daily carried about with them, in symbol of peace, an outrageously large fan, now obsolete. This fan was sufficiently large to protect the upper part of the body from sun or rain. It was found necessary to forbid its use in church, as the person of the owner was nearly hidden behind it. During the season of peace it was considered a most grave offence to cut down iron-wood on any pretence whatever; as under pretence of obtaining strong rafters for their houses, or the making of spades for husbandry, weapons of war might be manufactured. When the martyr Williams touched at Mangaia in 1 823, he learnt that a decisive battle had been fought two years previously ; but the drum of peace had not been beaten. Hence their favourite saying, that the men of that generation were awaiting the arrival of the Gospel of the Prince of Peace, whose word and reign constitute the true drum of peace. Davida and Tiere first caused them to hear the sweet melody; they emerged out of their hiding-places into the peace, light, and freedom of Christianity. The Sacrifice laid on the divine altar was no longer an unwilling victim selected from the slave tribes, but the free-will offering of the Son of God. The native words for "peace" 1 ("mangaia," "au"), also 1 The Bible phrase, "the peace of God" is rendered " te au " the rule and consequent peace of God. " 302 Myths and Songs. denote "rule," or "reign;" the rule of the temporal lord lasting only so long as no blood was spilt Once the charm broken, murders and reprisals might daily take place, provoking a pitched battle, sometimes a war of extermination. When the victors felt themselves secure, a human victim (sometimes more than one) must be secured, and all this burdensome ceremonial gone through again, ere peace and order could once more prevail. Hence the difficulty of native chronology; the "reigns," or "periods of peace," are most carefully enumerated ; the years of war and anarchy are invariably omitted. The means for correcting their chronology is supplied by the lifetimes of their priests, which axe well known. It is impossible that the errors should be serious, seeing the names of the three contemporaneous orders of priests (Motoro, Tane, and Tuaranga) are definitely ascertained. The last time the peace-drum was played was about the year 1815. The victim selected was Teata. Of course the poor old bald-headed fellow was kept in ignorance of the intentions of the sacrificers. On a certain evening the victim-seekers assembled on the level top of the central hill, to receive at the hands of the king " the sacred girdle." Upon reaching, by an unfrequented mountain path, the hut of Teata, they found it empty. They were not a little perplexed; for should their presence in the village be known, their intended victim would effectually hide himself in the rocks. At last, under cover of darkness, some of them asked the assistance of Rakoia. But Teata was maternal uncle to Rakoia, who well knew that the old man was liable to sacrifice at any time, as his ancestors had been before him. Rakoia resolved to secure to himself the merit and profit of delivering Teata into the hands of his foes. A few minutes previously he had left his uncle in a lone Human Sacrifices. 303 house built on poles in the middle of the taro patches. A short ladder led up to the hut With another relative (still living in 1875) and Teata, Rokoia had been rehearsing songs. Then they chatted pleasantly about the dire famine then prevailing. The old fellow patted his head, and remarked, " Could they get THIS (as an offering), the gods would send plenty again." At length Teata Vainekavoro snored, and Rakoia quietly slipped down the ladder and went home. As soon as the victim-seekers told him of their perplexity, Rakoia said, "Follow me, and you shall have your 'fish* " A race now took place between two warriors as to the honour of giving the death-blow. Rakoia led the way; on arriving at the top of the ladder he carefully pointed out the sleeping form of his uncle Teata. A single blow from the axe of Arokapiti ended the career of the old man, who an hour or two later in the same night was laid on the altar. And thus it was that the drum of peace for Pangemiro's temporal sovereignty came to be beaten. Hence the consideration ever paid amongst the chiefs to the word of Rakoia, who in 1846 succeeded his brother as chief, or governor, of Tamarua. Rakoia was one of the first to embrace Christianity; and until his death, in 1865, I never saw anything inconsistent with his profession as a disciple of Jesus. He was a faithful friend to the missionaries, and his last intelligent words were addressed to me expressive of his hope. At the period of his death he was about eighty years of age. He had fought in four pitched battles, besides several minor engagements. He was accounted the best poet of his day. After the death of Rakoia, a tract of taro-planting land in the possession of his nephews became a subject of discussion. None of the younger men had a clue to the title by which it was held. 304 Myths and Songs. Some proposed to give it to another tribe, to whom it anciently belonged. The old men of the tribe then confessed that the land in question was Pangemiro's formerly, but was formally given to Rakoia as the price of Teata's blood ! Shame had till then closed the lips of these old men; a shame which would never have been felt but for Christianity. According to the ancient dictum, "blood only can purchase what blood formerly secured Of course Rakoia's family retain the land. A month or two before the landing of Davida a sacrifice was sought for the public acknowledgment of Pangemiro's second election to the supreme temporal chieftainship. Reonatia was waylaid and slain (as was supposed) one night, upon his return from baracoota-fishing. A companion of his was uselessly slain at the same time. A long spear was driven through the body of the victim, and the body borne on a litter across the island to the altar. The coolness of the night revived Reonatia, after he had been laid on the altar, and the warriors had retired. He even descended to the ground, and despite the ghastly wound, unsteadily ran up the hillside a few yards. In a short time it was discovered, and this time a stone adze was employed to give the fatal blow, and the offering was replaced on the altar. But the dissensions which arose on account of this occurrence (that the gods were angry) prevented the completion of the ceremonies necessary to peace. Reonatia was the last human sacrifice ever laid on the altar of Rongo. The betrayer of Reonatia was Rouvi, who took part afterwards in the destruction of the maraes and the pantheon, and became one of the brightest ornaments of our Church. At a very advanced age say eighty-five he passed away from our midst. Human Sacrifices. 305 The heathen had prophesied that he would speedily die through the anger of the gods ; but he outlived every vestige of the heathen party, and was universally respected for his consistent attachment to the Truth. After the drum of peace had been sounded over the island, the king again employed his great net to remove the putrid carcass of the victim now minus ears and nose to a certain place in the bush within the limits of the marae. It was now designated an "ika aua na Papa," or fish-refuse thrown to Papa, mother of Rongo. She was supposed to come up at night to feed upon this ghastly banquet. The net itself was wrapped round and round the stone image of Great Rongo, and there allowed to decay. Inside this coarse net was the ordinary tiputa, or loose covering; on the head was a sort of hat made of folds of dark native cloth, giving to a spectator the impression that he was gazing at a living person. Near the image of Rongo the Great stood a small stone figure bearing the name of " Rongo-i-te-arero-kute " Rongo-ofthe-red-tongue. This little unclothed, unworshipped divinity seems to have been placed at the back of his friend to give emphasis to the title Rongo Nui = Rongo-the-Great. At Rimatara human sacrifices were continually being offered to Rono ( Rongo), but the " drum of peace " was unknown. KIRIKOVFS SACRIFICE. CIRCA A.D. 1772. After the battle at Teopu, the temporal lordship of Mangaia devolved upon Kirikovi. It was in his chieftainship, of some five or six years' duration, that Captain Cook touched at Mangaia. The first victim uselessly placed on the rude altar of Rongo, in 306 Myths and Songs. order that the drum of peace might be beaten, was Arauru, who, with the rest of the Teipe clan, had been hiding with the ancient tribe of Ngariki inside a grand and almost inaccessible cave named Erue. For a consideration of some valuable lands, To, cousin to the doomed man, engaged to lure Arauru out of his secure hiding-place to his death. Nor was this a difficult task, as this treacherous relative himself lived inside the cave. Ere it was quite day, To proposed to his victim that they should go fishing. Arauru objected, on the ground of danger ; but To, assured him that their foes had that day started off in a different direction. Accordingly they left Erue, and with some difficulty made their way through thickets towards the sea. When halfway (opposite to the present church), Arauru was startled by the loud chirp of a cricket in the air, and said to his deceitful companion, " Ara ! tera rava te Atua karanga ! " = " List to yon warning voice !" Twice did the unseen insect mysteriously address the infatuated Arauru, who kept on his way, and soon found himself encircled with armed men. That same day the unoffending victim was laid on the altar of Rongo. But Uanuku, the " wise man " (koromedua 1 ) of his day, and the author of a well-remembered dirge for Vera, wept and protested against the prayers for peace being chanted over his relative. The body of Arauru was accord, ingly thrown down a neighbouring chasm. A new and unobjectionable victim must be sought. Who so suitable as Maruata, who had no family ties to the winning tribes ? Despite all pledges of safety for himself and his children, he was in the dusk of evening enticed out of the cave Erue to a short distance and despatched. The prayers were duly offered, 1 Hence the native name for "Missionary," Orometua, meaning literally, ** a wise man* or instructor" " Orometua " is Tahitian for " Koromatua," Human Sacrifices. 307 and all the other ceremonies performed. Thus Kirikovi was installed paramount chief. As there were several Maruatas,this one is known as "Maruata who fell at loapa," the place where the victim was clubbed being so named. The wife of Maruata, who at an earlier period so narrowly escaped being eaten by Ngako, not only witnessed the cruel sacrifice of her husband, but also of some of her children in after years. To was himself offered in sacrifice at the commencement of the next reign. Arauru, Maruata, and To all worshipped the lizard-god Teipe. A "CRYING" SONG FOR MARUATA (PERTAINING TO THE "DEATH-TALK OF PUVAI"). BY KOROA, CIRCA 1795Used only by the Altar-tribe Teipe. TUMU. INTRODUCTION. Solo. Tio ra, tinaoia Maruata e ! Sing we of Maruata, slain for the altar, Ekitea mai nga erepua tei iaau, Though many were the promises E Mai e \ To thee, Mai ! Chorus. Aiuia mai taua e ! All, alas ! soon broken by Pae atiati Ngariki e ! Deceitful, lying Ngariki. 3 o8 Myths and Songs. PAPA. FOUNDATION. Solo. Akamoe ana era, e Mai e ! The clans were united, yet Mai fell! Chorus. Akamoe koe i te ivi-roa : Solemnly united to the ancient chiefs E tamaki kiato i Erue, ua tanimo e ! Yet brother sold brother to death a Erae. Solo. Ua tanimo tai kopu. Te raka nei tai aiai : ua e ia Mai e ! Maruata ra, tei o loapa e ! UNUUNU TAI. Tinaoia Maruata ra e ! Tinaoia Maruata nei : Ua koa tei Ngariki. Ua tapaia tai apaki, Apapatai ua tapariri. Pikao rauti ra I te taringa kotikoti O Maruata ia otoia ! Na Kongo te take i tingeti Ua kakina e ! Ua kakina Maruata nei. E kitea mai nga erepua tei iaau, E Mai e I They cruelly sold thee. Thou was deceived to thy death O Mai 1 Chorus. Yes, the Maruata who fell at loapa. FIRST OFFSHOOT. Solo. Alas for Maruata, slain for the altar Chorus. Maruata was slain for the altar ; (Ngariki only smiled thereat), Like so many others of his tribe, That but few now survive ! Wiapped in green ti leaves, Slices of Maruata's ears Announce all new possessions. Thy head, sacred to Kongo, Was hit and split in his name I Solo. Yes, Maruata, thy skull was split ; Though many were the promises To thee, O Mai ! 1 A second name for Maruata, Human Sacrifices. 309 Atuia mai taua e ! Pae atiati Ngariki e ! Chorus. All, alas !' soon broken by Deceitful, lying Nagriki. UNUUNU RUA. Na Paeru te ivi i akamoea'i ! Na Paeru te ivi i akamoea'i. Ua u taua i te mate o Uarau, Atuia mai e ua tapariri. Pikao rauti ra I te taringa kotikoti O Maruata ia otoia. Na Rongo te take i tingeti Ua kakina e ! Ua kakina Maruata nei. E kakina mai nga erepua tei iaau, E Mai g ! Atuia mai taua ! Pae atiati Ngariki S SECOND OFFSHOOT. Solo. The chief Paeru made league with thee. Chorus. Paeru himself made league with thee. We too faithfully followed their fortunes, Who betrayed thee to thy death. Wrapped hi green ti leaves, Slices of Maruata's ears Announce all new possessions. Thy head, sacred to Rongo, Was hit and split in his name. Solo. Yes, Maruata, thy skull was split; Though many were the promises To thee, O Mai ! Chorus. All, alas ! soon broken by Deceitful, lying NgarikL THE DEATH OF NGUTUKU (CIRCA 1810). ARRANGED FOR THE NATIVE HARMONICON. Voices only : as many as ten. Ngutuku te tuku, e te matakeinanga ; Ngutuku is doomed to perish, friends O taua teve, mangeo ua ra ! He who is as dangerous as the deadly "teve* 3io Myths and Songs. Tena te tamaki, e tiki ia Ku tei roto i Let us attack the guardian of the te rua. cave. Kua motu i te rauaika. His hour has come. Nana ia ka ora. He vainly dreams of safety. E tiki e ta i te rua o Tongaiti. Up, attack the stronghold of the Tongan clan. Vaarire te iki i te kapua e tangi ra. Vaanre is the offering 1 for the altar the price of peace. Music and Voices. Tera! Ngutuku, Ngutuku, Ngutuku Look yonder! Ngutuku, Ngutuku titiri ! Ngutuku has fallen. Ngutuku oki ka apai na Ngutuku is destined for the altar, I te kapua ei ika na Kongo. As a peace-offering to Kongo. Anatia kia mou, kia ketaketa. Secure the victim well to the litter. Kotia Vaarire, kotia Vaarire, kotia Vaarire is slain, Vaarire is slain, Ngutuku. , Ngutuku is slain ! Ngutuku, Ngutuku titiri ! Yes, Ngutuku, Ngutuku is hurled down. Voices only. Kua maranga o Vaarire i te kapua ! Ah, Vaarire is borne to the altar ! E uru tupu aiiki, e ika na Kongo ! Dance in triumph before this offering to Kongo. 2 E apai e takitaki aere. Lift it on high j bear it carefully on. Music and Voices. Vaarire te ika i mua. ' Bear in front the sacrifice (fish), Vaarire. E Vaarire te ika i te kapua ! Vaarire is destined for the altar. Tei runga au, na Tamarua, We scaled the entrance to his cave at Tamarua. Na Piti, e Piti, Piti, We now bear him along the road I na Veitatei ra : tukuroi ra i Vaipia Until reaching Veitatei we rest at the stream. 1 Vaarire was the original name of Ngutuku. Wherever I have translated " offering," the original is fish. 2 The ancient song of the butterflies, on page 292, is incorporated into this modern production. Human Sacrifices. 311 A na ! la ia ! ! tataki na ! And now for the war dance. Up with him. Kua naua. Oie puruki Kongo, We have succeeded. Such is the fiat of Rongo ! Oie puruki Rongo. So wills the god of war ! Romia mai, e te matakeinanga Onwards, onwards, brave friends. Kia takitaki tatou : takaki na uriuri. Toss him aloft. Dance the wardance. Ka apai ei kapua koe. Thou art on thy way to the altar. Music and Voices. Kua roiroi ka aere, a tau te vaapoiro, Once thou didst despatch 1 thy hurried mealj Anatia te peru ao ; The well-secured basket of tackle Akairi ra i te ua, Slung to thy shoulder Kia aere atu i te taatuatini, i te taatuaThou madest thy way to the sea for tini ! sport. E vaka no Ngutuku, e vaka taki A canoe for Ngutuku. Put in some koatu ; stones. E vaki taki aere. Launch thy frail bark. Kua kakaro i te matangi. Note well the wind. Kua tu te rirei ; kua tu te rirei ! The tokens are favourable ; 'twill be fair. E maro tikoru e ! itikitiki rouru e ! Thy girdle is secured \ thy hair tied up, Itikitiki rouru e ! Ready for the altar. Kotia ra e Kauare to metua, e Mua. O Muare I thy father was skin by Kauare. Kotia ra Ngutuku. Tena oa te Yes, Ngutuku was cut down by his tamaki ! hand. Kotia ra Ngutukfl ! la ! Ngutuku fell ! (War-dance.) I koia koe i te rakau. The spear entered thy body ! A puta koe i te puruki a Rongo ! Such is the resistless will of the god Rongo ! 1 Ngutuku was an expert fisherman; hence the reference to his daily avocations in this and the following stanza. Myths and Songs. Oi tatamaki koe ; oi tatamaki koe. O Taura tei mua ; Atiati te teina ; O Paraakere, o Veruara. Ka apai na to metua i te kapua \ For thou art of a restless and doomed race. Thy daughter 1 Taura leads the way : Atiati follows. Then comes (the youngest) Paraakere with her mother. father is Mng borne to the altar! MAKITAKA'S LAMENT ON THE LOSS OF THE TEMPORAL SOVEREIGNTY. COMPOSED BY TUKA, CIRCA A.D. 1815. Recited at a Reed-throwing Match. Solo. Taku. pua i tanu reka e ! Ua tanu ake koe i Tamarua E tupu te au e ! Fair tree planted by my hand ! Alas, for the tree of peace which Once flourished at Tamarua ! Teipoi arire riro akera Mangaia i te Alas, that Mangaia should be rave ! snatched from my grasp! 1 By a refinement of cruelty only possible to heathenism, the bearers of the sacrifice address the weeping children in the words, " Your father is being borne to the altar.-" Muare, the only son of the victim, did not follow the corpse, as he would have been put to death. He survived to Christian times, and became a member of the Church. Years before the first teachers landed, he induced Reinga to compose this song in commemoration of his father's tragical fate. Muare found a melancholy pleasure in chanting this song to its proper accompaniment of the haimonicon : indeed, he quite excelled at this outrageous performance. A few years ago he died the death of a Christian. His sister Paraakere died recently. Human Sacrifices. 313 Chorus. Ta Makitaka te ua, Makitaka, once supreme chief; A motu te toa ia Ngaki te miro. Now dispossessed by the fiat of Ngakiau. Solo. la Ngaki te miro ia Teata : Ah ! Ngaki 1 directed the sacrifice of Teata; O te uri oki na Aemata : Like all the descendants of Aemata, Tei nunga i te kapua. The victim was laid on the altar. Kore rai ooku taeake ! Unpitied unsaved ! Kore kore rai e taeake tangi e ! Alas ! unpitied unsaved ! Chorus. E tini na Tane i ka riro Mangaia. Mangaia is now transferred, Solo. Ua riro rai Mangaia rai, e Teau. Mangaia, friends, is lost. Ua e ia Maki, The chiefs dealt treacherously O te ivi koia i akamoea 'i e" ! After plighting their solemn troth. UNUUNU TAI. FIRST OFFSHOOT. Solo. Vaekura te pia i tara ! The priest of Tane planned it Chorus. Vaia te Amama, Amama o MakiSplit up the priestly tribe of Makitaka. taka. Vaekura te arataki. So willed Vaekura. Arataki aere atu Do thy worst ! Eia tu eia toa ? Why this bloodshed ? Ei Mangaia, ei Ngariki j To win Mangaia for a new dynasty. Ngariki o Makitaka. The fame of Makitaka is gone. E oa i te upoko ; Strike the head (of the altarvictim). R oa i to rae. Strike the temples, la tangi a pu ; As if a conch-shell sounded la tangi kekina ; Is the falling of the axe. 1 Ngaki is a shortened form of Tane Ngakiau. 314 Myths and Songs. Ia ara i te pa ; The wounded are shrieking : la ara i te mate. Are awakened only to die ! A tara nei e Tane. Tane has gained the victory. Kare kaiti kau rere ! Alas I Alas ! ! Alas ! ! Alas I ! Solo. Ua riro rai Mangaia rai, e Tcau* Mangaia, fnends, is lost. Ua e ia Maki, The chiefs dealt treacherously, te ivi koia i akamoea 'i e ! After plighting their solemn troth. Teipoi arire riro akera Mangaia e i te Alas, that Mangaia should be rave ! snatched from my grasp ! Chorus. la Makitaka te ua. Makitaka, once supreme chief; A motu te tea la Ngaki te miro* Now dispossessed by the fiat of Ngakiau. Solo. la Ngaki te aiiro ia Teata : Ah ! Ngaki directed the sacrifice of Teata; O te uri oki na Aemata. Like all the descendants of Aemata, Tei nunga e i te kapua. The victim was laid on the altar. Kore rai ooku taeak ! Unpitied unsaved ! Kore kore rai e taeake tangi e ! Alas 1 unpitied unsaved ! Chorus. E tini na Tane i ka riro Mangaia. Mangaia is now transferred* UNUUNU RUA, SECOND OFFSHOOT. Solo. Tutukiria nga ivi e ! Let brother slay brother. Chorus. Ka tu au ka aere y I will arise and fight. Ka aere taua e ! Join our band. I nunga i te tuaronga. Away to yon plain Taukarokaro i reira. To fight our foes. Tena te vai maka. Stones are flying about, Human Sacrifices. 315 E vai koatu 5 ! Out of the slings of the brave. E vai rakau e ! Spears are uplifted. ICa ui te vai. The chiefs pause a moment A pa te vai. To examine the omens. A pa te toa ia Tauokura. Death-blows are being dealt, la katamutamu ia karearea. Fearful are the shouts of the victors. Te vaa i koma 'i. Alas, those lips that once spake ! Te vaa i tara 'i. Alas, the mouth once shouted ! KLa tara nei, e Tane. Tane has gained the victory. ICare kaiti kau rere ! Alas ! Alas I ! Alas ! 1 Alas ! ! Solo. Ua riro rai Mangaia rai, e Teau. Mangaia, friends, is lost. Ua e ia Maki, The chiefs dealt treacherously, O te ivi koia i akamoea 'i e 1 After plighting their solemn troth. Teipoi arire riro akera Mangaia i te Alas, that Mangaia should be ravS ! snatched from my grasp ! Chorus. la Makitaka te ua. Makitaka, once supreme chief ; A motu te toa ia Ngaki te miro. Now dispossessed by the fiat of Ngakiau. Solo. la Ngaki te miro ia Teata : Ah ! Ngaki directed the sacrifice of Teata ; O te uri oki na Aemata : Like all the descendants of Aemata, Tei nunga e i te kapua, The victim was laid on the altar. Kore rai ooku taeake ! Unpitied unsaved ! Kore kore rai e taeake tangi e ! Alas Chorus. E tini na Tane i ka riro Mangaia. 