(Rain, Heat, and Plenty.} 1. Akau. Breadfruit appears ; chestnut and other trees in blossom* This month is also known as "the time of beautiful cocoa-nut leaves" (marama o te kikau). Akau extends from the middle of December to the middle of January. 2. Otunga* Breadfruit and chestnut trees covered with, fruit, but not ripe. Sprats 1 arrive. Hills covered with reeds in blossom. PAR6RO, OR WINTER. (Drought, Cold, and Scarcity.} iv Paroro. Cold south winds, withering up the wild vines everywhere. 2. Mantf. Incubation of birds. The woodpecker bores the dead cocoanut for a nest. The titi bores the side of the mountain. Coral-tree in blossom. Warrior-spirits take their departure from earth. 3. Pipiri* Muffled up inside the house, on account of the cold. 1 The two months preceding the arrival of sprats are called " te karaii koa," or "time of exhausted crabs," they having made their way from the rocks to the sea to spawn. In like manner the interior of man is supposed to be empty and weak, until the arrival of sprats gives new life. During these hot and enfeebling months children are fractious and troublesome, but should on no account be beaten ! The Seasons, P liases of the Moon, etc. 317 3. JZautua, or " kautua a kere4. Kaunuunu. Papaka, or landkere" = " trail-of-the-ed" The soil crab, comes out of its hiding-place is everywhere furrowed with water, as to feed, and is easily caught though traversed by eels. Time of Also called "karaii," or "crab floods. season." 4. Akamakuru. Some breadfruit 5. M#u. 1 Spring tip. Alltubeand chestnuts fall unripe, worm eaten. rous roots in the soil spring into life. So, too, some brave men are sure to Also said "kua tuputhe anau kai" die prematurely this moon. Hurri=' { all plants in leaf/' cane month (end of March). 6. Vaetd. Trees, stones, bush 5. Muriaa, or "ruruangakakao," everywhere covered with the vines of i.e. the reed blossoms are shed upon the wild yam; the o'e, or bitter yam; the hills by a late blow. mararau, or sweet yam, etc. , etc. Na6. Uringa, or "dead." The leaves, tive arrow-root and "teve" roots are etc., of the yam, arrow-root, etc., etc., luxuriant. The year ends about the fall. middle of December. 7. Miringa, or "finishing up" (of the food of ereu, or summer season). Thirteen moons in alL The arrival of the new year was indicated by the appearance of Matariki, or Pleiades, on the eastern horizon just after sunset, i.e. about the middle of December. Hence the idolatrous worship paid to this beautiful cluster of stars in many of the South Sea Islands. The Pleiades were worshipped at Danger Island, and at the Penrhyns, down to the introduction of Christianity in 1857. In many islands extravagant joy is still manifested at the rising of this constellation out of the ocean. The knowledge of the calendar belonged to the kings, as they alone fixed the feasts in honour of the gods, and all public spectacles. For others to dare to keep the calendar was a sin against the gods, to be punished with hydrocele. 1 The same name for the Magellan clouds ; as if the rising up ofvapour^ or curling up of columns of smoke in the heavens. Myths and Songs. CHANGES OF THE MOON (TE TAU AROPO). 3 Amiama. 4 Amiama-akaoti, i.& Last Amiama, 5 Tamatea. IN THE WEST. 1 Iro. Sacred to Iro, patron of thieves. Favourable for thieving, 2 Oata= shadow, & moon seen in shadow. ' Sprats arrive during these three days in Feb. Failing that, expect them the same days in , March. 6 Tamatea-akaoti, i.e. Last Tamatea. 7 Korekore. 8 1) Korekore-akaoti, ie. Last Koreskore. 9 OVari (z>. Vari-ma-te-takere == the Originator-of-aU-things.) 10 Una. 11 Maaru. 12 Ua. 13 E atua = A god. 14 O Tu, i.e. Tu-metua, the last made of the major gods, 15 O Marangi, 1 or Full-Moon. IN THE EAST. 16 Oturu. 17 Rakau. 18 Rakau-roto, i.e. Second Rakau. 19 Rakau-akaoti, le. Last Rakau. 20 Korekore. 21 Korekore-roto, i.e. Second Korekore. 22 Korekore-akaoti, i.e. Last Korekore. 23 ([ Tangaroa. Sacred to Tangaroa. 24 Tangaroa-roto. Second night sacred to Tangaroa. 25 Tangaroa-akaoti. Last night sacred to Tangaroa. 26 O Tane. Sacred to Tane. 27 Rongo-Nui, i*e. Rongo-the-Great. The 26th and 27th were fite jughts Rongo and Tane being patrons of their dances in time of peace. 28 Mauri =s ghost 29 Omutu = ended. 30 Otire o Avaiki (abbreviated "Otireo") = Lost in the depths of Avaiki. At Rarotonga the i3th is "Maitu," instead of "Atua" (sense similar). Otherwise this account of the changes of the moon is equally good for Rarotonga. Allowing for the difference of dialects, it is the same in the Tahitian islands. 1 Cocoa-nuts were invariably planted at the full of the moon ; the size of the moon symbolfcing the full roundness of the future fruit. The Seasons, Phases of the Moon, etc. 319 From the iyth to the 28th the nights were considered favourable for fishing j also favourable for catching the fish of the gods, i.e. men. In other words, these were murder nights. Tangaroa (23rd) and O Tane (26th) and Rongo-Nui (27th) were the three " most lucky " for this cruel purpose. The eastern Polynesians, like the New Zealanders, invariably reckon by nights not, as we do, by days. For example, "Po ia koe i te aerenga? " = " How many nights were you journeying? " etc., etc. THE MARINER'S COMPASS OF POLYNESIA. To the Chinese belongs the honour of inventing the mariner's compass, long anterior to the Christian era. It was known to the Arabs in mediaeval times, and from them, through the Crusaders, the knowledge spread -over Europe. There can be no reasonable doubt that Polynesia was peopled from Asia. Did the original settlers take with thsm the mariner's compass, or anything analogous thereto ? May not the ancestors of the present South Sea Islanders have been far more civilized than their descendants ? The absence of iron throughout Polynesia would easily account for the loss of the magnet. Subjoined is a plan of the winds for the Hervey Group from the lips of the ancient priests. With slight variations it will do for many other groups in the Pacific. The number of wind-holes in this plan exactly corresponds with the points of the mariner's compass. In the olden time, great stress was laid on this knowledge for the purpose of fishing, and especially for their long sea voyages from group to group. At the edge of the horizon are a series of holes, some large and some small, through which Raka, the god of winds, 320 Myths and Songs. and his children, love to blow. Hence the phrase in daily use, "rua matangi," or "wind~/M?," where Europeans would simply speak of "wind." The "head" of the winds is supposed to be in the east ; by the time it has veered round to s.w. by w. it is named the iku, or "tail ;" in fact, it is dying away until it becomes, in the s.s.w., merely an uru, or " like the touch of a feather." Cyclones, of course, begin in the N.E., and go on increasing in violence until, on reaching the iku 9 or " tail," they moderate. Passing on to the uru> or "feathery," there is a perfect calm, mocking the desolations so lately wrought The Seasons, . Phases of the Moon, etc. 321 The whole of these names have, more or less, a figurative signification. The reader will observe the word anau (give birth) several times recurring. Taking, for example, akarua for N., the wind, in veering towards the w., becomes akarua anau; i.e. the north giving birth to a new wind (N. by w.). As the wind veers to the N.N.W, it is called akarua tu; that is, the akarua strong enough to stand. Taking maoake for N.E., when the wind shifts a point it becomes maoake anau; that is, the N.E. giving birth (N.E. by N.). Advancing still towards the N., it is called maoake ta, or the killing or terrible maoake (N.N.E.), on account of the extreme violence of this wind when a cyclone blows. The vast concave above was symbolised by the interior of a calabash, in the lower part of which a series of small apertures was made to correspond with the various wind-holes at the edge of the horizon. Each hole was stopped up with cloth. Should the wind be unfavourable for a grand expedition, the chief priest, began his incantation by withdrawing the plug from the aperture through which the unpropitious wind was supposed to blow. Rebuking this wind, he stopped up the hole, and advanced through all the intermediate apertures, moving plug by plug, until the desired wind-hole was reached. This was left open, as a gentle hint to the children of Raka that the priest wished the wind to blow steadily from that quarter. The operator having a good knowledge of the ordinary course of the winds, and the various indications of change, the peril ot the experiment was not great Providence has supplied these islanders with an unfailing natural indication of an approaching cyclone. This is expressed in the phrase, " Kua taviriviri te kao o te meika " i.e. the core of 322 Myths and Songs. the true native banana is strangely twisted and contorted some weeks previous to a hurricane, as if to give warning of impending danger. This is usually associated with an extraordinary growth of food. Doubtless the excessive moisture and heat which occasion this rapid growth, and give rise to the strange twists of the wondrously delicate leaves of this banana, are the real causes of cyclones. POLYNESIAN PLURALS. JN early all the plurals in use in the Hervey Group have a definite signification as nouns. i. A common plural is " are? which literally means " a house: " in its plural use it may be rendered " a-house-full-of," ?".. "many." Thus "e are atua" = "a number ^gods;" literally, "a-housefull-of gods ;" " e are apinga " = "a number of valuable things ; " literally, "a-house-full-of valuable things." 2. A second plural is "vaka" = "canoe;" or, as it may be rendered, " a-canoe-full-of." Thus " e vaka angela" = "a host of angels ; " literally, "a-canoefull-of angels ; " " e vaka puruki " = "a host of warriors ; " literally, " acanoe-full-of warriors." 3. Another frequently used plural is "fa " = "enclosure: door." Thus " e pa puaka " = " a pig enclosure ; " ~ a pig-sty ; " e pa maunga " = " a range of mountains," as enclosing a valley; The Seasons, Phases of the Moon, etc. 323 "e pa enua" = "a group of islands/' as if a portion of the ocean were thereby marked off or enclosed. 4. A commonly used plural is " ata " = " shelf to place all sorts of food on." Thus " e ata pa " = " a number of doors ; " " e ata kete " = "a number of food-baskets." 5. A still more interesting plural is " rau" = "leaf? Thus we may speak of "te rau tangata o te Atua," i.e. "a people numerous as the leaves of a tree, worshipping such and such a god." The figure is of a vast tree, the growth of ages. The huge trunk represents the god, the branches the lesser divinities, the leaves the worshippers ever dropping off by death, and ever being renewed by fresh births. This is constantly applied to the servants of the true God : Jehovah being the trunk and branches, believers the leaves. 6. The last instance of plurals is "maru" = "shadow? or " shade? Thus the natives daily speak of " te maru tangata o te Atua," i.e. " the people who sit under the shadow of God? The old idea was still of an ancient tree overshadowing the marae filled with worshippers. The noblest trees affording the best shade were planted in their idol groves, not a twig of which might be plucked. As applied ' to Christian worshippers gathering Sabbath after Sabbath in the house of God to take refreshment under the shadow of the Almighty (Psalm xc. i), the figure is extremely beautiful. In the Tahitian dialect the "r" is dropped, "maru" 1 becoming 1 The Aitutakians speak of " te taru ariki " = the chiefs, or kings Mangaians speak of " te tau ariki." ** Taru " on Mangaia is a verb, " to heap up," to " cover over with new soil." It is easy to trace the connecting link of thought, i.e. the entire assembly of chiefs. 324 Myths and Songs. " man" the ordinary plural of that group. Doubtless our common plural " au " is the same as the " mau " of the Eastern islands. The full form, " maru," is the dignified form to be used whenever the gods and chiefs are spoken of. It is scarcely fair to regard " anau " = family, as a plural. Thus the natives speak of " te anau ika " = " the whole family of fish ; " " te anau kai " " the whole family of plants." A very polite mode of address in the Mangaian dialect is the use of the third person singular, dual, and plural, where in other languages the second person would be appropriate ; reminding one of the use of the German Sie. POLYNESIAN NUMERATION. The mode of counting in use amongst the Papuan population of the Loyalty Islands, New Caledonia, and the New Hebrides, is worthy of notice. They enumerate by fingers up to five, which makes " one hand j " ten is " two hands ; " twenty is "an entire man," i.e. ten fingers and ten toes. A hundred is " five men," and so on. This plan is ingenious, but clumsy, being applicable only to small numbers. Missionaries labouring in those islands have wisely discarded it I was much surprised when first I heard the school children at Aneiteum, Mare, and Lifu, repeating the English multiplication table with great facility and correctness, The Seasons, Phases of the Moon, etc. 325 and on the Sabbath to hear the chapter and hymns announced in English figures the natives turning to the right chapter or hymn in their own books. This innovation, however, has brought down upon the missionaries the ire of the French. Throughout the Eastern Islands there has been no need for changing the original system of numeration. In the Hervey Group we have two distinct bases four and ten. The former base is used in counting cocoa-nuts, which were from time immemorial tied up in fours (kaviri) : 5 bunches (kaviri) of cocoa-nuts make one takau, i.e. 20 10 takau rau, i.e. 200 10 rau mano, i.e. 2,000 10 mano kiu, i.e. 20,000 10 kiu tini, Le. 200,000 All beyond this is uncertain. To express more the natives simply heap up the highest figures, without any attempt at a definite signification ; thus, " mano, mano ; tini, tini," literally, "2,000 on 2,000; 200,000 on 200,000;" much as we say " myriads on myriads," or " millions on millions," i.e. innumerable. In measures of length they were from time out of mind accustomed to the fathom (the outstretched arms of a tall man), half-fathom, span, and finger's length. Ten fathoms (paru) make one "kume." In this way 100 would be called 10 "kume ;" 200 would be 20 "kume," and so on. Through the Eastern dialects there is a very close resemblance of the primary numerals. In the expression for five, i.e. 326 Myths and Songs. " e rima," or " a hand," we may trace a point of resemblance between the Papuan and Malay systems of numeration. Throughout the Ellice's Group ten is expressed by " katoa " = all (i.e. the fingers). The "rau" 1 is a favourite number, continually occurring in their stories of the past. In a decisive battle fought circa eighty-nine years ago, Potai boasted a " rau " = 200 warriors ; whilst the winner, Potiki, had only 120 (6 takau). " Eternity" is often expressed by the phrase " e rau te tautau," t.e. " 200 ages.' 3 This is less poetical than the common " e rimua ua atu '* = " until covered with the moss of unknown ages," as of a lofty cocoa-nut or other tree entirely moss-grown. Another mode of expressing the same idea is, " e tuatau ua atu," i.e. " time on on, still on." " also means "leaf," or "pandanus thatch." A native house requires about 200 reeds of thatch to complete one side: "rau," therefore, may mean indifferently a leaf, 200, or a "tua.-rau," i.e. thatched side of a dwelling.
