SKALDSKAPARMAL NORSE MYTHOLOGY

In the beginning, before the heaven and the earth

and the sea were created, the great abyss Ginungagap

was without form and void, and the spirit of Fimbultyr

moved upon the face of the deep, until the ice-cold rivers,

the Elivogs, flowing from Niflheim, came in contact with

the dazzling flames from Muspelheim. This was before

Chaos.

And Fimbultyr said: Let the melted drops of vapor

quicken into life, and the giant Ymer was born in the

midst of Ginungagap. He was not a god, but the father

of all the race of evil giants. This was Chaos.

And Fimbultyr said : Let Ymer be slain and let order

be established. And straightway Odin and his broth-

ers— the bright sons of Bure— gave Ymer a mortal
wound, and from his body made they the universe ; from

his flesh, the earth; from his blood, the sea; from his

bones, the rocks ; from his hair, the trees ; from his skull,

the vaulted heavens; from his eye- brows, the bulwark

called Midgard. And the gods formed man and woman

in their own image of two trees, and breathed into them

the breath of life. Ask and Embla became living souls,
and they received a garden in Midgard as a dwelling-place

for themselves and their children until the end of time.

This was Cosmos.
5



b PREFACE.

The gods themselves dwelt in Asgard. Some of them

were of the mighty Asa-race: Valfather Odin, and Frigg

his Queen; Thor, the master of Mjolner; Balder, the

good; the one-handed Tyr; Brage, the song-smith. Idun

having the youth-giving apples, and Heimdal, the watcher

of Asgard. Others were mild and gentle vans: Njord,

Frey, and Freyja, the goddess of love ; but in the midst

of Asgard in daily intercourse with the gods, the serpent

Loke, the friend of the giants, winded his slimy coils.

To these gods our Teutonic ancestors offered sacri-

fices, to them prayers ascended, and from them came such

blessings as each god found it proper to bestow. Most of

all were these gods worshiped on the battle-field, for

there was the home of the Teuton. There he lived and

there he hoped some day to die; for if the norns, the

weavers of fate, permitted him to fall sword in hand,

then would he not descend to the shades of Hel, but

be carried in valkyrian arms up to Valhal, where a new

life would be granted unto him, or better, where he would

continue his earthly life in intercourse with the gods.

Happy gatherings at the banquet, where the flowing
mead-horn was passed freely round, and where words

of wisdom and wit abounded, or martial games with

sharp swords and spears, were the delight of the asas.

Under the ash Ygdrasil they met in council, and if they
ever appeared outside of the walls of Asgard, it was to

go on errands of love, or to make war on the giants,
their enemies from the beginning. Especially did Thor

seldom sit still when he heard rumors of giants; with



PREFACE. 7

his heavy hammer, Mjolner, he slew Hrungner and the

Midgard-serpent, gave Thrym and all that race of

giants bloody bridal-gifts in Freyja's garments, and

frightened the juggler Loke, of Utgard, who had to re-

sort to his black art for safety. Thus lived the gods in

heaven very much like their worshipers on earth, ex-

cepting that Idun's apples ever preserved them fresh

and youthful.

But Loke, the serpent, was in the midst of them.

Frigg's heart was filled with gloomy forebodings in regard
to Balder, her beloved son, and her mind could not find

rest until all things that could harm him had sworn not

to injure Balder. Now they had nothing to fear for the
best god, and with perfect abandon and security they
themselves • made him serve as a mark, and hurled darts,

stones and other weapons at him, whom nothing could
scathe. But the serpent Loke was more subtle than any
one within or without Asgard, whom Fimbultyr had made ;
and he came to Hoder, the blind god, put the tender mis-

tletoe in his hand and directed his arm, so that Balder

sank from the joys of Valhal down into the abodes of

pale Hel, and did not return. Loke is bound and tor-

tured, but innocence has departed from Asgard ; among
men there are bloody wars ; brothers slay brothers ; sen-

sual sins grow huge; perjury has taken the place of

truth. The elements themselves become discordant, and

then comes the great Fimbul-winter, with its howling

storms and terrible snow, that darkens the air and takes

all gladness from the sun.



8 PREFACE.

The world's last day approaches. All bonds and fet-

ters that bound the forces of heaven and earth together

are severed, and the powers of good and of evil are

brought together in an internecine feud. Loke advances

with the Fenris-wolf and the Midgard-serpent, his own

children, with all the hosts of the giants, and with Surt,

who flings fire and flame over the world. Odin advances

with all the asas and all the blessed einherjes. They

meet, contend, and fall. The wolf swallows Odin, but

Vidar, the Silent, sets his foot upon the monster's lower

jaw, he seizes the other with his hand, and thus rends

him till he dies. Frey encounters Surt, and terrible

blows are given ere Frey falls. Heimdal and Loke

fight and kill each other, and so do Tyr and the dog
Garm from the Gnipa Cave. Asa-Thor fells the Mid-

gard-serpent with his Mjolner, but he retreats only nine

paces when he himself falls dead, suffocated by the ser-

pent's venom. Then smoke wreathes up around the ash

Ygdrasil, the high flames play against the heavens, the

graves of the gods, of the giants and of men are swallowed

up by the sea, and the end has come. This is Eagnarok,
the twilight of the gods.

But the radiaat dawn follows the night. The earth,

completely green, rises again from the sea, and where

the mews have but just been rocking on restless waves,
rich fields unplowed and unsown, now wave their golden
harvests before the gentle breezes. The asas awake to a

new life, Balder is with them again. Then comes the

mighty Fimbultyr, the god who is from everlasting to



PREFACE. y

everlasting; the god whom the Edda skald dared not
name. The god of gods comes to the asas. He comes

to the great judgment and gathers all the good into

Gimle to dwell there forever, and evermore delights en-

joy; but the perjurers and murderers and adulterers he

sends to Nastrand, that terrible hall, to be torn by Nid-

hug until they are purged from their wickedness. This

is Eegeneration.

These are the outlines of the Teutonic rehgion. Such

were the doctrines established by Odin among our an-

cestors. Thus do we find it recorded in the Eddas of

Iceland.

The present volume contains all of the Younger
Edda that can possibly be of any importance to Eng-
lish readers'. In fact, it gives more than has ever be-

fore been presented in any translation into English,

German or any of the modern Scandinavian tongues.
We would recommend our readers to omit the Fore-

words and Afterwords until they have perused the

Fooling of Gylfe and Brage's Speech. The Forewords

and Afterwords, it will readily be seen, are written by

a later and less skillful hand, and we should be sorry

to have anyone lay the book aside and lose the pleas-

ure of reading Snorre's and Olafs charming work, be-

cause he became disgusted with what seemed to him

mere silly twaddle. And yet these Forewords and After-

words become interesting enough when taken up in con-

nection with a study of the historical anthropomorphized

Odin. With a view of giving a pretty complete outline



10 PREFACE.

of the founder of the Teutonic race we have in our

notes given all the Heimskringla sketch of the Black

Sea Odin. We have done this, not only on account of
the material it furnishes as the groundwork of a Teu-

tonic epic, which we trust the muses will ere long
direct some one to write, but also on account of the

vivid picture it gives of Teutonic life as shaped and

controlled by the Odinic faith.

All the poems quoted in the Younger Edda have in

this edition been traced back to their sources in the

Elder Edda and elsewhere.

Where the notes seem to the reader insufficient, we

must refer him to our Norse Mythology, where he will,

we trust, find much of the additional information he

may desire.

Well aware that our work has many imperfections,
and beggmg our readers to deal generously with our

shortcomings, we send the book out into the world

with the hope that it may aid some young son or

daughter of Odin to find his way to the fountains of

Urd and Mimer and to Idun's rejuvenating apples.
The son must not squander, but husband wisely, what

his father has accumulated. The race must cherish

and hold fast and add to the thought that the past

has bequeathed to it. Thus does it grow greater and

richer with each new generation. The past is the mir-

ror that reflects the future.

THE YOUl^GER EDDA.

INTRODUCTION.

The records of our Teutonic past have hitherto
received but slisrht attention from the Encrlish-

speaking branch of the great world-ash Ygdrasil.
This indifference is the more deplorable, since a

knowledge of our heroic forefathers would nat-

urally operate as a most powerful means of keep-
ing alive among us, and our posterity, that spirit
of courage, enterprise and independence for which
the old Teutons were so distinguished.
The religion of our ancestors forms an impor-

tant chapter in the history of the childhood of

our race, and this fact has induced us to offer the

public an English translation of the Eddas.

Edda. Readers specially interested in this knotty-

subject we must refer to Wilkins' elaborate trea-

tise, Untersuchungen zur Snorra Edda (Paderborn,
1878), and to P. E. Muller's, Die ^chtheit der

Asalehre (Copenhagen, 1811).
Two celebrated names that without doubt are

intimately connected with the work are Snorre
Sturleson and Olaf Thordsson Hvitaskald. Both

of these are conspicuous, not only in the literary,
but also in the political history of Iceland.

Snorre Sturleson* was born in Iceland in the

year 1178. Three years old, he came to the

house of the distinguished chief, Jon Loptsson,
at Odde, a grandson of Ssemund the Wise, the

reputed collector of the Elder Edda, where he

appears to have remained until Jon Loptsson's

death, in the year 1197. Soon afterward Snorre

married into a wealthy family, and in a short

time he became one of the most distinguished
leaders in Iceland. He was several times elected
chief magistrate, and no man in the land was his

equal in riches and prominence. He and his two
elder brothers, Thord and Sighvat, who were but
little inferior to him in wealth and power, were

at one time well-nigh supreme in Iceland, and

Snorre sometimes appeared at the Althing at

Thingvols accompanied by from eight hundred

to nine hundred armed men.
*
Keyser.



INTRODUCTION. 21

Snorre and his brothers did not only have bit-

ter feuds with other families, but a deadly hatred

also arose between themselves, making their lives

a perpetual warfare. Snorre was shrewd as a

politician and magistrate, and eminent as an ora-

tor and skald, but his passions were mean, and

many of his ways were crooked. He was both
ambitious and avaricious. He is said to have
been the first Icelander who laid plans to sub-

jugate his fatherland to Norway, and in this con-

nection is supposed to have expected to become

a jarl under the king of Norway. In this effort

he found himself o'Utwitted by his brother's son,
Sturle Thordsson, and thus he came into hostile

relations with the latter. In this feud Snorre

was defeated, but when Sturle shortly after fell
in a battle against his foes, Snorre's star of hope
rose again, and he began to occupy himself with

far-reaching, ambitious plans. He had been for
the first time in Norway during the years 1218-

1220, and had been well received by King Ha-

kon, and especially by Jarl Skule, who was then
the most influential man in the country. In the

year 1237 Snorre visited Norway again, and en-

tered, as it is believed, into treasonable conspira-

cies with Jarl Skule. In 1239 he left Norway
against the wishes of King Hakon, whom he
owed obedience, and thereby incurred the king's

greatest displeasure. When King Hakon, in



22 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

1240, had crushed Skule's rebellion and annihi-

lated this dangerous opponent, it became Snorre's

turn to feel the effects of the king's wrath. At
the instigation of King Hakon, several chiefs of

Iceland united themselves against Snorre and

murdered him at Reykholt, where ruins of his

splendid mansion are still to be seen. This event

took place on the 22d of September, 1241, and

Snorre Sturleson was then sixty-three years old.

Snorre was Iceland's most distinguished skald and

sagaman. As a writer of history he deserves to
be compared with Herodotos or Thukydides. His

Heimskringla, embracing an elaborate history of

the kings of Norway, is famous throughout the

civilized world, and Emerson calls it the Iliad

and Odyssey of our race. An English transla-
tion of this work was published by Samuel Laing,
in London, in 1844. Carlyle's Early Kings of

Norway (London, 1875) was inspired by the

Heimskringla.
Olaf Thordsson, surnamed Hvitaskald,* to dis-

tinguish him from his contemporary, Olaf Svar-

taskald,f was a son of Snorre's brother. Though
not as prominent and influential as his uncle, he

took an active part in all the troubles of his na-

tive island during the first half of the thirteenth

century. He visited Norway in 1236, whence he
went to Denmark, where he was a guest at the

* White Skald, f Black Skald.



INTRODUCTION. 23

court of King Valdemar, and is said to have en-

joyed great esteem. In 1240 we find him again
in Norway, where he espoused the cause of King
Hakon against Skule. On his return to Iceland
he served four years as chief magistrate of the

island. His death occurred in the year 1259, and

he is numbered among the great skalds of Ice-
land.

Snorre Sturleson and Olaf Hvitaskald are the

two names to whom the authorship of the Young-
er Edda has generally been attributed, and the
work is by many, even to this day, called Snorra

Edda— that is, Snorre's Edda. We do not pro-
pose to enter into any elaborate discussion of this

complicated subject, but we will state briefly the
reasons given by Keyser and others for believing
that these men had a hand in preparing the Prose
Edda. In the first place, we find that the writer
of the grammatical and rhetorical part of the

Younger Edda distinctly mentions Snorre as au-
thor of Hattatal (the Clavis Metrica), and not

only of the poem itself, but also of the treatise in

prose. In the second place, the Arne Magnsean

parchment manuscript, which dates back to the

close of the thirteenth or beginning of the four-

teenth century, has the following note prefaced
to the Skaldskaparmal .

" Here ends that part of

the book which Olaf Thordsson put together, and

now begins Skaldskaparmal and the Kenningar,



24 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

according to that which has been found in the

lays of the chief skalds, and which Snorre after-

ward suffered to be brought together." In the

third place, the Upsala manuscript of the Younger
Edda, which is known with certainty to have
been written in the beginning of the fourteenth

century, contains this preface, written with the

same hand as the body of the work :
" This book

hight Edda. Snorre has compiled it in the man-

ner in which it is arranged : first, in regard to

the asas and Ymer, then Skaldskaparmal and the

denominations of many things, and finally that

Hattatal, which Snorre composed about King Ha-

kon and Duke Skule." In the fourth place, there
is a passage in the so-called Annales Breviores,

supposed to have been written about the year
1400. The passage relates to the year 1241, and

reads thus :
" Snorre Sturleson died at Reykholt

He was a wise and very learned man, a great
chief and shrewd. He was the fii-st man in this
land who brought property into the hands of the

king (the king of Norway). He compiled Edda
and many other learned historical works and
Icelandic sagas. He was murdered at Reykholt
by Jarl Gissur's men."

It seems, then, that there is no room for any
doubt that these two men have had a share in

the authorship of the Younger Edda. How great
a share each has had is another and more difficult



INTRODUCTIpN. 25

problem to solve. Rudolf Keyser's opinion is

(and we know no higher authority on the sub-

ject), that Snorre is the author, though not in so

strict a sense as we now use the word, of Gyl-
faginning, Brage's Speech, Skaldskaparmal and

Hattatal. This part of the Y'ounger Edda may
thus be said to date back to the year 1230, though
the material out of w^hich the mythological sys-
tem is constructed is of course much older. We
find it in the ancient Vala's Prophecy, of the

Elder Edda, a poem that breathes in every line
the purest asa-faith, and is, without the least

doubt, much older than the introduction of Chris-

tianity in the north, or the discovery and settle-

ment of Iceland. It is not improbable that the

religious system of the Odinic religion had as-

sumed a permanent prose form in the memories
of the people long before the time of Snorre, and

that he merely was the means of having it com-

mitted to writing almost without verbal change.
Olaf Thordsson is unmistakably the author of

the grammatical and rhetorical portion of the

Younger Edda, and its date can therefore safely
be put at about 1250. The author of the trea-
tise on the alphabet is not known, but Professor

Keyser thinks it must have been written, its first

chapter, about the year 11 50, and its second chap-
ter about the year 1200. The forewords and
afterwords are evidently also from another pen.



26 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Their author is unknown, but they are thought
to have been written about the year 1300. To
sum up, then, we arrive at this conclusion : The

mythological material of the Younger Edda is as
old as the Teutonic race. Parts of it are written

by authors unknown to fame. A small portion
is the work of Olaf Thordsson. The most im-

portant portion is written, or perhaps better, com-

piled, by Snorre Sturleson, and the whole is

finally edited and furnished with forewords and

afterwords, early in the fourteenth century,
— ac-

cording to Keyser, about 1320-1330.

About the name Edda there has also been
much learned discussion. Some have suggested
that it may be. a mutilated form of the word

Odde, the home of Ssemund the Wise, who was

long supposed to be the compiler of the Elder

Edda. In this connection, it has been argued
that possibly Ssemund had begun the writing of

the Youjiger Edda, too. Others derive the word

from ot5r (mind, soul), which in poetical usage
also means song, poetry. Others, again, connect

Edda with the Sanscrit word Veda, which is sup-
posed to mean knowledge. Finally, others adopt
the meaning which the word has where it is act-

ually used in the Elder Edda, and where it means

great-grandmother. Vigfusson adopts this defini-

tion, and it is certainly both scientific and poet-
ical. What can be more beautiful than the idea



INTRODUCTION. 27

that our great ancestress teaches her descendants

the sacred traditions, the concentrated wisdom,
of the race? To sum up, then, we say the Younger,
or Prose, or Snorre's Edda has been produced at
different times by various hands, and the object
of its authors has been to produce a manual for

the skalds. In addition to the forewords and after-

words, it contains two books, one greater (Gyl-

faginning) and one lesser (Brage's Speech), giv-

ing a tolerably full account of Norse mythol-

ogy. Then follows Skaldskaparmal, wherein is

an analysis of the various circumlocutions prac-
ticed by the skalds, all illustrated by copious

quotations from the poets. How much of these
three parts is written by Snorre is not certain,
but on the other hand, there is no doubt that he

is the author of Hattatal (Clavis Metrica), which

gives an enumeration of metres. To these four
treatises are added four chapters on grammar and

rhetoric. The writer of the oldest grammatical
treatise is thought to be one Thorodd Eunemas-

ter, who lived in the middle of the twelfth cen-

tury ; and the third treatise is evidently written

by Olaf Thordsson Hvitaskald, the nephew of

Snorre, a scholar who spent some time at the
court of the Danish king, Valdemar the Victorious.

The Younger Edda contains the systematized
theogony and cosmogony of our forefathers, while

the Elder Edda presents the Odinic faith in a



28 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

series of lays or rhapsodies. The Elder Edda is

poetry, while the Younger Edda is mainly prose.
The Younger Edda may in one sense be regarded
as the sequel or commentary of the Elder Edda.

Both complement each other, and both must be

studied in connection with the sao-as and all the

Teutonic traditions and folk-lore in order to get
a comprehensive idea of the asa-faith. The two
Eddas constitute, as it were, the Odinic Bible.

The Elder Edda is the Old Testament, the Young-
er Edda the New. Like the Old Testament, the
Elder Edda is in poetry. It is prophetic and

enigmatical. Like the New Testament, the

Younger Edda is in prose ; it is lucid, and gives
a clue to the obscure passages in the Elder Edda.

Nay, in many respects do the two Eddas cor-

respond with the two Testaments of the Christian

Bible.

It is a deplorable fact that the religion of our

forefathers seems to be but little cared for in this

country. The mythologies of other nations every
student manifests an interest for. He reads with
the greatest zeal all the legends of Kome and

Greece, of India and China. He is familiar wdth

every room in the labyrinth of Crete, while when
he is introduced to the shining halls of Valhal

and Gladsheim he gropes his way like a blind
man. He does not know that Idun, with her
beautiful apples, might, if applied to, render even



INTEODUCTION. 29

greater services than Ariadne with her wonderful

thread. When we inquire whom Tuesday and

Wednesday and Thursday and Friday are named

after, and press questions in reference to Tyr,

Odin, Thor and Freyja, we get at best but a wise
and knowing look. Are we, then, as a nation,
like the ancient Jews, and do we bend the knee
before the gods of foreign nations and forsake the

altars of our own gods? What if we then
should suffer the fate of that unhappy people

—
be scattered over all the world and lose our

fatherland? In these Eddas our fathers have

bequeathed unto us all their profoundest, all

their sublimest, all their best thought. They
are the concentrated result of their greatest intel-

lectual and spiritual effort, and it behooves us to

cherish this treasure and make it the fountain at
which the whole American branch of the Ygdra-
sil ash may imbibe a united national sentiment.
It is not enough to brush the dust off these gods
and goddesses of our ancestors and put them up
on pedestals as ornaments in our museums and
libraries. These coins of the past are not to be

laid away in numismatic collections. The grand-
son must use what he has inherited from his

grandfather. If the coin is not intelligible, then

it will have to be sent to the mint and stamped

anew, in order that it may circulate freely. Our



30 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

ancestral deities want a place in our hearts and

in our songs.
On the European continent and in England

the zeal of the priests in propagating Christianity
was so great that they sought to root out every
trace of the asa-faith. They left but unintelligi-
ble fragments of the heathen religious structure.

Our gods and goddesses and heroes were consigned
to oblivion, and all knowledge of the Odinic re-

ligion and of the Niblung-story would have been
well nigh totally obliterated had not a more

lucky star hovered over the destinies of Iceland.

In this remotest corner of the world the ancestral

spirit was preserved like the glowing embers of

Hekla beneath the snow and ice of the glacier.
From the farthest Thule the spirit of our fathers
rises and shines like an aurora over all Teuton-

dom. It was in the year 860 that Iceland was

discovered. In 874 the Teutonic spirit fled thith-

er for refuge from tyranny. Here a government
based on the principles of old Teutonic liberty
was established. From here went forth daring
vikings, who discovered Greenland and Vinland,
and showed Columbus the way to America.
From here the courts of Norway, Sweden, Den-

mark, England and Germany were supplied with
skalds to sing their praises. Here was put in

writing the laws and sagas that give us a clue to

the form of old Teutonic institutions. Here was



INTRODUCTION. 31

preserved the Old Norse language, and in it a

record of the customs, the institutions and the re-

ligion of our fathers. Its literature does not

belong to that island alone,
— it belongs to the

whole Teutonic race ! Iceland is for the Teutons

what Greece and Kome are for the south of Eu-

rope, and she accomplished her mission with no

less efficiency and success. Cato the Elder used to

end all his speeches with these words : ^''Prmterea

censeo CartJiaginem esse delendamr In these

days, when so many worship at the shrine of Ro-

manism, we think it perfectly just to adopt Cato's
sentence in this form: Prosterea censeo Momam
esse delendam.





FOREWORD.

1. In the beginning Almighty God created
heaven and earth, and all things that belong to

them, and last he made two human beings, from
whom the races are descended (Adam and Eve),
and their children multiplied and spread over all

the world. But in the course of time men be-
came unequal ; some were good and right-believ-

ing, but many more turned them after the lusts
of the world and heeded not God's laws

;
and for

this reason God drowned the world in the flood,
and all that was quick in the world, except those

who were in the ark with Noah. After the
flood of Noah there lived eight men, who in-
habited the world, and from them the races are

descended
;
and now, as before, they increased

and filled the world, and there were very many
men who loved to covet wealth and power, but
turned away from obedience to God, and so much
did they do this that they would not name God.
And who could then tell their sons of the won-
derful works of God? So it came to pass that

they lost God's name ; and in the wide world the
man was not to be found who could tell of his



34 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Maker. But, nevertlieless, God gave them earthly
gifts, wealth and happiness, that should be with

them in the world
;
he also shared wisdom among

them, so that they understood all earthly things,
and all kinds that might be seen in the air and

on the earth. This they thought upon, and won-

dered at, how it could come to pass that the earth
and the beasts and the birds had the same nature

in some things but still were unlike in manners.

One evidence of this nature was that the earth

might be dug into upon high mountain-peaks
and water would spring up there, and it was not

necessary to dig deeper for water there than in

deep dales; thus, also, in beasts and birds it is

no farther to the blood in the head than in the

feet. Another proof of this nature is, that every

year there grow on the earth grass and flowers,
and the same year it falls and withers ; thus, also,
on beasts and birds do hair and feathers grow
and fall off each year. The third nature of the

earth is, that when it is opened and dug into,
then grass grows on the mould which is upper-
most on the earth. Rocks and stones they ex-

plained to correspond to the teeth and bones of

living things. From these things they judged
that the earth must be quick and must have life

in some way, and they knew that it was of a

wonderfully great age and of a mighty nature.

It nourished all that was quick and took to itself



FOREWORD. 35

all that died. On this account they gave it a

name, and numbered their ancestors back to it.

This they also learned from their old kinsmen,
that when many hundred winters w^ere numbered,
the course of the heavenly bodies was uneven ;
some had a longer course than others. From
such things they suspected that some one must

be the ruler of the heavenly bodies who could

stay their course at his own will, and he must be

strong and mighty ; and of him they thought
that, if he ruled the prime elements, he must also

have been before the heavenly bodies, and they
saw that, if he ruled the course of the heavenly

bodies, he must rule the sunshine, and the dew
of the heavens, and the products of the earth that

follow them
;
and thus, also, the winds of the air

and therewith the storms of the sea. They knew
not where his realm was, but they believed that he

ruled over all things on the earth and in the air,
over the heavens and the heavenly bodies, the seas

and the weather. But in order that these things

might be better told and remembered, they gave
him the same name with themselves, and this be-
lief has been changed in many ways, as the peo-
ples have been separated and the tongues have

been divided.

2. In his old age Noah shared the w^orld with
his sons: for Ham he intended the western re-
gion, for Japheth the northern region, but for



36 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Shem the southern region, with those parts which
will hereafter be marked out in the division of

the earth into three parts. In the time that the

sons of these men were in the world, then in-
creased forthwith the desire for riches and power,
from the fact that they knew many crafts that
had not been discovered before, and each one

was exalted with his own handiwork
;
and so far

did they carry their pride, that the Africans,
descended from Ham, harried in that part of the
world which the offspring of Shem, their kins-

man, inhabited. And when they had conquered
them, the world seemed to them too small, and

they smithied a tower with tile and stone, which

they meant should reach to heaven, on the plain
called Sennar. And when this building was so
far advanced that it extended above the air, and

they were no less eager to continue the work,
and when God saw how their pride waxed high,
then he sees that he will have to strike it down
in some way. And the same God, who is al-

mighty, and who might have struck down all
their work in the twinkling of an eye, and made

themselves turn into dust, still preferred to frus-

trate their purpose by making them realize their

own littleness, in that none of them should under-
stand what the other talked; and thus no one

knew what the other commanded, and one broke
what the other wished to build up, until they came



FOREWOED. 37

to strife among themselves, and therewith was frus-

trated, in the beginning, their purpose of building
a tower. And he who was foremost, hight Zo-

roaster, he laughed before he wept when he came
into the world

;
but the master-smiths were sev-

enty-two, and so many tongues have spread over
the world since the giants were dispersed over

the land, and the nations became numerous. In

this same place was built the most famous city,
which took its name from the tower, and w^as
called Babylon. And when the confusion of

tongues had taken place, then increased the names

of men and of other things, and this same Zo-
roaster had many names ; and although he under-
stood that his pride was laid low by the said

building, still he worked his way unto worldly
power, and had himself chosen king over many
peoples of the Assyrians. From him arose the
error of idolatry ; and when he was worshiped
he was called Baal; we call him Bel; he also
had many other names. But as the names in-
creased in number, so was truth lost ; and from

this first error every following man worshiped
his head-master, beasts or birds, the air and the

heavenly bodies, and various lifeless things, until

the error at length spread over the whole world ;
and so carefully did they lose the truth that no

one knew his maker, excepting those men alone
who spoke the Hebrew tongue,

— that which



38 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

flourished before the building of the tower,
— and

still they did not lose the bodily endowments

that were given them, and therefore they judged
of all things with earthly understanding, for spir-
itual wisdom was not given unto them. They
deemed that all things were smithied of some

one material.

3. The world was divided into three parts, one
from the south, westward to the Mediterranean

Sea, which part was called Africa ; but the south-

ern portion of this part is hot and scorched by
the sun. The second part, from the west and to

the north and to the sea, is that called Europe,
or Enea. The northern portion of this is cold, so

that grass grows not, nor can anyone dwell there.

From the north around the east region, and all
to the south, that is called Asia. In that part of

the world is all beauty and pomp, and wealth of

the earth's products, gold and precious stones.

There is also the mid-world, and as the earth

there is fairer and of a better quality than else-

where, so are also the people there most richly
endowed with all gifts, with wisdom and strength,
with beauty and with all knowledge.

4. Near the middle of the world was built the

house and inn, the most famous that has been

made, which was called Troy, in the land which

we call Turkey. This city was built much larger
than others, with more skill in many ways, at



FOEEWORD. 39

great expense, and with such means as were at

hand. There were twelve kingdoms and one over-

king, and many lands and nations belonged to
each kingdom ; there were in the city twelve chief

languages."^ Their chiefs have surpassed all men
who have been in the world in all heroic things.
No scholar who has ever told of these things has
ever disputed this fact, and for this reason, that

all rulers of the north region trace their ancestors

back thither, and place in the number of the gods
all who were rulers of the city. Especially do

they place Priamos himself in the stead of Odin ;
nor must that be called wonderful, for Priamos

was sprung from Saturn, him whom the north

region for a long time believed to be God him-
self

5. This Saturn grew up in that island in

Greece which hight Crete. He was greater and

stronger and fairer than other men. As in other
natural endowments, so he excelled all men in
wisdom. He invented many crafts which had
not before been discovered. He was also so

great in the art of magic that he was certain

about things that had not yet come to pass. He

found, too, that red thing in the earth from

which he smelted gold, and from such things he

soon became very mighty. He also foretold har-

* Dasent translates
"
hovutStungur

"
(chief or head tongues) with

**

lords," which is certainly an error.



40 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

vests and many other secret things, and for such,
and many other deeds, he was chosen chief of the
island. And when he had ruled it a short time,
then there speedily enough became a great abun-

dance of all things. No money circulated except-
ing gold coins, so plentiful was this metal; and

though there was famine in other lands, the crops
never failed in Crete, so that people might seek

there all the things which they needed to have.

And from this and many other secret gifts of

power that he had, men believed him to be God,
and from him arose another error among the
Cretans and Macedonians like the one before
mentioned among the Assyrians and Chaldeans
from Zoroaster. And when Saturn finds how

great strength the people think they have in

him, he calls himself God, and says that he rules

heaven and earth and all things.
6. Once he went to Greece in a ship, for there

was a kin2:'s dau2:hter on whom he had set his
heart. He Avon her love in this way, that one

day when she was out with her maid-servants, he
took upon himself the likeness of a bull, and lay
before her in the wood, and so fair was he that
the hue of gold was on every hair; and when
the king's daughter saw him she patted his lips.
He sprang up and threw off the bull's likeness
and took her into his arms and bore her to the

ship and took her to Crete. But his wife, Juno,



FOREWORD. 41

found this out, so lie turned her (the king's

daughter) into the likeness of a heifer and sent

her east to the arms of the great river (that is, of

the Nile, to the Nile country), and let the thrall,
who hight Argulos, take care of her. She was
there twelve months before he changed her shape

again. Many things did he do like this, or even
more wonderful. He had three sons : one hight
Jupiter, another Neptune, the third Pluto. They
were all men of the greatest accomplishments,
and Jupiter was by far the greatest ; he was a
warrior and won many kingdoms; he was also

crafty like his father, and took upon himself the

likeness of many animals, and thus he accom-

plished many things which are impossible for

mankind; and on account of this, and other

things, he was held in awe by all nations. There-
fore Jupiter is put in the place of Thor, since all

evil wights fear him.

7. Saturn had built in Crete seventy-two burgs,
and when he thought himself firmly established
in his kingdom, he shared it with his sons, whom
he set up with himself as gods ; and to Jupiter he

gave the realm of heaven ; to Neptune, the realm

of the earth, and to Pluto, hell; and this last

seemed to him the worst to manage, and there-

fore he gave to him his dog, the one whom he
called Cerberos, to guard hell. This Cerberos,
the Greeks say, Herakles dragged out of hell and



42 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

upon earth. And although Saturn had given
the realm of heaven to Jupiter, the latter never-

theless desired to possess the realm of the earth,
and so he harried his father's kingdom, and it

is said that he had him taken and emasculated,
and for such great achievements he declared him-

self to be god, and the Macedonians say that he

had the members taken and cast into the sea,
and therefore they believed for ages that there-

from had come a woman
;
her they called Venus,

and numbered among the gods, and she has in
all ages since been called goddess of love, for

they believed she Avas able to turn the hearts

of all men and vromen to love. When Saturn
was emasculated by Juj)iter, his son, he fled from
the east out of Crete and west into Italy. There

dwelt at that time such people as did not woi*k,
and lived on acorns and grass, and lay in caves

or holes in the earth. And when Saturn came
there he changed his name and called himself

Njord, for the reason that he thought that Ju-

piter, his son, might afterward seek him out. He
was the first there to teach men to plow and

plant vineyards. There the soil was good and

fresh, and it soon produced heavy crops. He was
made chief and thus he got possession of all the
realms there and built many burgs.

8. Jupiter, his son, had many sons, from whom
races have descended

;
his son was Dardanos, his



FOREWORD. 4cJ

son Herikon, his son Tros, his son Ilos, his son

Laomedon, the father of the chief king Priamos.

Priamos had many sons ; one of them was Hek-

tor, who was the most famous of all men in the
world for strength, and stature and accomplish-
ments, and for all manly deeds of a knightly
kind; and it is found written that when the
Greeks and all the strength of the north and

east regions fought with the Trojans, they would

never have become victors had not the Greeks

invoked the gods; and it is also stated that no

human strength would conquer them unless they
were betrayed by their own men, which after-
ward was done. And from their fame men that
came after gave themselves titles, and especially
was this done by the Romans, who were the
most famous in many things after their days;
and it is said that, when Rome was built, the
Romans adapted their customs and laws as nearly
as possible to those of the Trojans, their fore-

fathers. And so much power accompanied these
men for many ages after, that when Pompey, a
Roman chieftain, harried in the east region, Odin
fled out of Asia and hither to the north country,
and then he gave to himself and his men their

names, and said that Priamos had hight Odin
and his queen Frigg, and from this the realm

afterward took its name and was called Frigia
where the burg stood. And whether Odin said



44 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

this of himself out of pride, or that it was

wrought by the changing of tongues ; neverthe-
less many wise men have regarded it a true

saying, and for a long time after every man who
was a great chieftain followed his example.

9. A king in Troy hight Munon or Mennon,
his wife was a daughter of the head-king Priamos

and hight Troan; they had a son who hight
Tror, him we call Thor. He was fostered in
Thrace by the duke, who is called Loricos. But
when he was ten winters old he took his father's

weapons. So fair of face was he, when he stood

by other men, as when ivory is set in oak;
his hair was fairer than gold. When he was
twelve winters old he had fall strength; then

he lifted from the ground ten bear skins all at

once, and then he slew Loricos, the duke, his

foster-father and his wife, Lora or Glora, and

took possession of Thrace ; this we call Thrud-
heim. Then he visited many lands and knew
the countries of the world, and conquered single-
handed all the berserks and all the giants, and

one very big dragon and many beasts. In the
north region he found that prophetess who hight
Sibyl, whom we call Sif, and married her. None
can tell the genealogy of Sif; she was the fairest

of all women, her hair was like gold. Their son

was Loride (Hloride), who was like his father;
his son was Henrede

;
his son Vingethor (Ving-



FOREWORD. 45

thor); his son Vingener (Vingner); Ms son
Moda (Mode) ; his son Magi (Magne) ; his son
Kesfet

;
his son Bedvig ; his son Atra, whom we

call Annan; his son Itrman; his son Heremod

(Hermod) ; his son Skjaldun, whom we call

Skjold; his son Bjaf, whom we call Bjar; his
son Jat

;
his son Gudolf, his son Fjarlaf, whom

we call Fridleif
;
he had the son who is called

Vodin, whom we call Odin; he was a famous
man for wisdom and all accomplishments. His
wife hight Frigida, whom we call Frigg.

10. Odin had the power of divination, and so
had his wife, and from this knowledge he found

out that his name would be held high in the
north part of the world, and honored beyond
that of all kings. For this reason he was eager
to begin his journey from Turkey, and he had

with him very many people, young and old, men
and women, and he had with him many costly
things. But wherever they fared over the lands

great fame was spoken of them, and they were
said to be more like gods than men. And they
stopped not on their journey before they came

north into that land which is now called Sax-
land

;
there Odin remained a long time, and sub-

jugated the country far and wide. There Odin

established his three sons as a defense of the

land. One is named Yeggdegg ; he was a strong
king and ruled over East Saxland. His son was



46 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Vitrgils, and his sons were Kitta, the father of

Heingest (Hengist), and Sigar, the father of

Svebdegg, whom we call Svipdag. Another son
of Odin hight Beldegg, whom we call Balder;
he possessed the land which now hight Vestfal ;
his son was Brander, and his son Frjodigar,
whom we call Froda (Frode). His son was

Freovit, his son Yvigg, his son Gevis, whom we
call Gave. The third son of Odin is named

Sigge, his son Verer. These forefathers ruled

the land which is now called Frankland, and
from them is come the race that is called the

Volsungs. From all of these many and great
races are descended.

11. Then Odin continued his journey north-

ward and came into the country which was

called Reidgotaland, and in that land he con-

quered all that he desired. He established there
his son, who hight Skjold; his son hight Fridleif ;
from him is descended the race Avhich hight

Skjoldungs; these are the Dane kings, and that

land hight now Jutland, which then was called

Reidgotaland.
12. Thereupon he fared north to what is now

called Svithjod (Sweden), there was the king
who is called Gylfe. But w^hen he heard of the

coming of those Asiamen, who were called asas,
he went to meet them, and offered Odin such

things in his kingdom as he himself might desire.



FOREWORD. 47

And such good luck followed their path, that
wherever they stopped in the lands, there were

bountiful crops and good peace ; and all believed

that they were the cause thereof. The mighty
men of the kingdom saw that they were unlike
other men whom they had seen, both in respect
to beauty and understanding. The land there

seemed good to Odin, and he chose there for

himself a place for a burg, which is now called

Sigtuna.'^* He there established chiefs, like unto
what had formerly existed in Troy ; he appointed
twelve men m the burg to be judges of the law
of the land, and made all rights to correspond
with what had before been in Troy, and to what

the Turks had been accustomed.

13. Thereupon he fared north until he reached

the sea, which they thought surrounded all lands,
and there he established his son in the kingdom,
which is now called Norway; he is hight Sa-

ming, and the kings of Norway count their an-
cestors back to him, and so do the jarls and

other mighty men, as it is stated in the Haleygja-
tal.f But Odin had with him that son who is
called Yngve, who was king in Sweden, and from
him is descended the families called Ynglings

(Yngvelings). The asas took to themselves
wives there within the land. But some took

*Near Upsala.
tA heroic poem, giving the pedigree (tal) of Norse kings.



48 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

wives for their sons, and these families became

so numerous that they spread over Saxland, and

thence over the whole north region, and the

tongue of these Asiamen became the native

tongue of all these lands. And men think they
can understand from the way in which the names
of their forefathers is written, that these names

have belonged to this tongue, and that the asas

have brought this tongue hither to the north,
to Norway, to Sweden and to Saxland. But in

England are old names of places and towns

which can be seen to have been given in another

tongue than this.



THE FOOLmG OF GYLFE.

CHAPTER I.

GEFJUN'S PLOWING.

1. King Gylfe ruled the lands that are now
called Svithjod (Sweden). Of him it is said that
he gave to a wayfaring woman, as a reward for

the entertainment she had afforded him by her

story-telling, a plow-lan(J. in his realm, as large
as four oxen could plow it in a day and a night.
But this woman was of the asa-race

;
her name

was Gefjun. She took from the north, from Jo-

tunheim, four oxen, which were the sons of a giant
and her, and set them before the plow. Then
went the plow so hard and deep that it tore up
the land, and the oxen drew it westward into the

sea, until it stood still in a sound. There Gef-

jun set the land, gave it a name and called it See-
land. And where the land had been taken away
became afterward a sea, which in Sweden is now
called Logrinn (the Lake, the Malar Lake in

Sweden). And in the Malar Lake the bays cor-
49



50 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

respond to the capes in Seeland. Thus says

Brage, the old skald :

Gefjun glad
Drew from Gylfe
The excellent land,
Denmark's increase,
So that it reeked

From the running beasts.
Four heads and eight eyes
Bore the oxen

As they went before the wide
Robbed land of the grassy isle.*

*Heimskringla: Ynglinga Saga, eh. v.



I

CHAPTER n.

GYLFE'S JOURNEY TO ASGARD.

2. King Gylfe was a wise man and skilled in
the black art. He wondered much that the asa-
folk was so mighty in knowledge, that all things
went after their will. He thought to himself
whether this could come from their own. nature,
or whether the cause must be sought for among
the gods whom they worshiped. He therefore
undertook a journey to Asgard. He went secret-

ly, having assumed the likeness of an old man,
and striving thus to disguise himself. But the

asas were wiser, for they see into the future, and,

foreseeing his journey before he came, they re-

ceived him with an eye-deceit. So when he came
into the burg he saw there a hall so high that

he could hardly look over it. Its roof was thatched

with golden shields as with shingles. Thus says
Thjodolf of Hvin, that Valhal was thatched with

shields :

Thinking thatchers

Thatched the roof;
The beams of the burg
Beamed with gold.*

*
Heimskringla: Harald Harfager's Saga, ch, xix.

51



52 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

In the door of the hall Gylfe saw a man who

played with swords so dexterously that seven

were in the air at one time. That man asked
him what his name was. Gylfe answered that
his name was Ganglere;^ that he had come a

long way, and that he sought lodgings for the

night. He also asked who owned the burg.
The other answered that it belonged to their

king: I will go with you to see him and then

you may ask him for his name yourself Then
the man turned and led the way into the hall.

Ganglere followed, and suddenly the doors closed

behind him. There he saw many rooms and a

large number of people, of whom some were

playing, others were drinking, and some were

fighting with weapons. He looked around him,
and much of what he saw seeijaed to him incredi-
ble. Then quoth he :

Gates all,

Before in you go,
You must examine well;
For you cannot know
Where enemies sit
In the house before you.f

He saw three high-seats, one above the other,
and in each sat a man. He asked what the
names of these chiefs were. He, who had con-

ducted him in, answered that the one who sat

*The walker. f Elder Edda: Havaraal.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 58

in the lowest high-seat was king, and hight Har;
the one next above him, Jafnhar; but the one

who sat on the highest throne, Thride. Har
asked the comer what more his errand was, and

added that food and drink was there at his ser-

vice, as for all in Har's hall. Ganglere answered

that he first would like to ask whether there was

any wise man. Answered Har: You will not
come out from here hale unless you are wiser.

And stand now forth
While you ask;
He who answers shall sit.



CHAPTER ni.

OF THE HIGHEST GOD.

3. Ganglere then made the following question :
Who is the highest and oldest of all the gods ?
Made answer Har: Alfather he is called in our

tongue, but in Asgard of old he had twelve

names. The first is Alfather, the second is
Herran or Herjan, the third Nikar or Hnikar,
the fourth Nikuz or Hnikud, the fifth Fjolner,
the sixth Oske, the seventh Ome, the eighth
Biflide or Biflinde, the ninth Svidar, the tenth

Svidrer, the eleventh Vidrer, the twelfth Jalg or

Jalk. Ganglere asks again : Where is this god ?
What can he do? What mighty works has he

accomplished? Answered Plan He lives from

everlasting to everlasting, rules over all his

realm, and governs all things, great and small.

Then remarked Jafnhar: He made heaven and

earth, the air and all things in them. Thride

added: What is most important, he made man
and gave him a spirit, which shall live, and never

perish, though the body may turn to dust or
burn to ashes. All who live a life of virtue shall
dwell with him in Gimle or Vingolf The wicked,

54



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 55

on the other hand, go to Hel, and from her to

Niflhel, that is, down into the ninth world. Then
asked Ganglere: What was he doing before
heaven and earth were made ? Har gave answer ;
Then was he with the frost-giants.



CHAPTER IV.

THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.

4. Said Ganglere : How came the world into
existence, or liow did it rise ? What was before ?
Made answer to him Har: Thus is it said

in^
the Vala's Prophecy :

It was Time's morning,
When there nothing was;
Nor sand, nor sea.
Nor cooling billows.
Earth there was not,
Nor heaven above.
The Ginungagap was,
But grass nowhere.*

Jafnhar remarked : Many ages before the earth
was made, Niilheim had existed, in the midst of

which is the well called Hvergelmer, whence flow

the follomng streams: Svol, Gunnthro, Form,

Fimbul, Thul, Slid and Hrid, Sylg and Ylg, Vid,

Leipt and Gjoll, the last of which is nearest the

gate of Hel. Then added Thride: Still there
was before a world to the south which hight

Muspelheim. It is light and hot, and so bright
and dazzling that no stranger, who is not a

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 6.
56



THE FOOLING OF OYLFE. o7

native there, can stand it. Surt is the name of

him who stands on its border guarding it. He
has a flaming sword in his hand, and at the end

of the world he will come and harry, conquer
all the gods, and burn up the whole world with

fire. Thus it is said in the Vala's Prophecy:

Surt from the south fares

With blazing flames;
From the sword shines
The sun of the war-god.
Rocks dash together
And witches collapse,
Men go the way to Hel
And the heavens are cleft.*

5. Said Ganglere : What took place before the
races came into existence, and men increased and

multiplied? Keplied Har, explaining, that as

soon as the streams, that are called the Elivogs,
had come so far from their source that the ven-

omous yeast which flowed with them hardened,
as does dross that runs from the fire, then it

turned into ice. And when this ice stopped and
flowed no more, then gathered over it the driz-

zling rain that arose from the venom and froze

into rime, and one layer of ice was laid upon the

other clear into Ginungagap. Then said Jafn-

har: All that part of Ginungagap that turns

toward the north was filled with thick and

heavy ice and rime, and everywhere within were

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 56.



58 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

drizzling rains and gusts. But the soutli part
of Ginungagap was lighted up by the glowing

sparks that flew out of Muspelheim. Added
Thride: As cold and all things grim proceeded
from Niflheim, so that which bordered on Mus-

pelheim was hot and bright, and Ginungagap
was as warm and mild as windless air. And
when the heated blasts from Muspelheim met
the rime, so that it melted into drops, then, by
the might of him who sent the heat, the drops
quickened into life and took the likeness of a

man, who got the name Ymer. But the Frost

giants call him Aurgelmer. Thus it is said in

the short Prophecy of the Vala (the Lay of

Hyndla):
All the valas are

From Vidolf descended;
All wizards are

Of Vilmeide's race;
All enchanters

Are sons of Svarthofde;
All giants have

Come from Ymer.*

And on this point, when Vafthrudner, the

giant,
was asked by Gangrad :

Whence came Aurgelmer
Origmally to the sons

Of the giants?—thou wise giant! t

* Elder Edda: Hyndla's Lay, 34.

t Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 30.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 59

he said

From the Elivogs
Sprang drops of venom,
And grew till a giant was made.
Thence our race

Are all descended,
Therefore are we all so fierce.*

Then asked Ganglere: How were the races
developed from him ? Or what was done so that
more men were made? Or do you believe him
to be god of whom you now spake? Made
answer Har: By no means do we believe him
to be god ; evil was he and all his offspring, them
we call

frost-giants. It is said that when he

slept he fell into a sweat, and then there grew
under his left arm a man and a woman, and one
of his feet begat with the other a son. From
these come the races that are called frost-giants.
The old frost-giant we call Ymer.

6. Then said Ganglere : Where did Ymer

dwell, and on what did he live ? Answered Har :
The next thing was that when the rime melted
into drops, there was made thereof a cow, which

hight Audhumbla. Four milk-streams ran from

her teats, and she fed Ymer. Thereupon asked

Ganglere : On what did the cow subsist ? An-
swered Har : She licked the salt-stones that were
covered with rime, and the first day that she

* Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 31.



60 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

licked the stones there came out of them in the

evening a man's hair, the second day a man's

head, and the third day the whole man was
there. This man's name was Bure

;
he was fair

of face, great and mighty, and he begat a son

whose name was Bor. This Bor married a wo-

man whose name was Bestla, the daughter of

the giant Bolthorn; they had three sons,
— the

one hight Odin, the other Vile, and the third

Ve. And it is my belief that this Odin and his
brothers are the rulers of heaven and earth. We
think that he must be so called. That is the

name of the man whom we know to be the

greatest and most famous, and well may men call
him by that name.

7. Ganglere asked: How could these keep
peace with Ymer, or who was the stronger?
Then answered Har : The sons of Bor slew the

giant Ymer, but when he fell, there flowed so
much blood from his wounds that they drowned
therein the whole race of frost giants ; excepting

one, who escaped with his household. Him the

giants call Bergelmer. He and his wife went
on board his ark and saved themselves in it.

From them are come new races of frost-giants,
as is here said :

Countless winters

Ere the earth was made,
Was born Bergelmer.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 61

This first I call to mind
How that crafty giant
Safe in his ark lay.*

8. Then said Ganglere : What was done then by
the sons of Bor, since you believe that they were

gods ? Answered Har : About that there is not
a little to be said. They took the body of Ymer,
carried it into the midst of Ginungagap and

made of him the earth. Of his blood they made
the seas and lakes; of his ilesh the earth was

made, but of his bones the rocks; of his teeth

and jaws, and of the bones that were broken,

they made stones and pebbles. Jafnhar remarked :
Of the blood that flowed from the wounds, and
was free, they made the ocean; they fastened
the earth together and around it they laid this

ocean in a ring without, and it must seem to

most men impossible to cross it. Thride added :

They took his skull and made thereof the sky,
and raised it over the earth with four sides.

Under each corner they set a dwarf, and the four
dwarfs were called Austre (east), V«stre (West),
Nordre (North), Sudre (South). Then they took

glowing sparks, that were loose and had been
cast out from Muspelheim, and placed them in
the midst of the boundless heaven, both above and

below, to light up heaven and earth. They gave
resting-places to all fires, and set some in heaven ;

* Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 35.



62 THE YOUNGEK EDDA.

some were made to go free under heaven, but

tliey gave them a place and shaped their course.
In old songs it is said that from that time days
and years were reckoned. Thus in the Prophecy
of the Vala :

The san knew not
Where her hall she had;
The moon knew not
What might he had;
The stars knew not
Their resting-places.*

Thus it was before these things were made.
Then said Ganglere : Wonderful tidings are these
I now hear; a wondrous great building is this,
and deftly constructed. How was the earth
fashioned? Made answer Har: The earth is

round, and without it round about lies the deep

ocean, and along the outer strand of that sea

they gave lands for the giant races to dwell in ;
and against the attack of restless giants they
built a burg within the sea and around the

earth. For this purpose they used the giant
Ymer's eyebrows, and they called the burg Mid-

gard. They also took his brains and cast them

into the air, and made therefrom the clouds, as

is here said :

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 8. In Old Norse the sun is

feminine, and the moon masculine. See below, sections 11 and 12.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 63

Of Ymer's flesh
The earth was made,
And of his sweat the seasj
Rocks of his bones,
Trees of his hair,

And the sky of his skull;
But of his eyebrows
The blithe powers
Made Midgard for the sons of men.
Of his brains
All the melancholy
Clouds were made.*

* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 40, 41. Comp. Vafthrudner's Lay, 21.



CHAPTER V.

THE CREATION— (CONTINUED.)

9. Then said Ganglere : Miicli had been done,
it seemed to me, when heaven and earth were

made, when sun and moon were set in their

places, and when days were marked out; but
whence came the people who inhabit the world ?
Har answered as follows: As Bor's sons went

along the sea-strand, they found two trees. These

trees they took up and made men of them. The
first gave them spirit and life; the second en-

dowed them with reason and power of motion ;
and the third gave them form, speech, hearing
and eyesight. They gave them clothes and

names
;
the man they called Ask, and the woman

Embla. From them all mankind is descended,
and a dwelling-place was given them under

Midgard. In the next place, the sons of Bor

made for themselves in the middle of the world

a burg, which is called Asgard, and which we

call Troy. There dwelt the gods and their race,
and thence were wrought many tidings and ad-

ventures, both on earth and in the sky. In

Asgard is a place called Hlidskjalf, and when
64



THE FOOLING OF GTLFE. 6b

Odin seated himself there in the high-seat, he

saw over the whole world, and what every man
was doing, and he knew all things that he saw.
His wife hight Frigg, and she was the daughter
of Fjorgvin, and from their offspring are de-

scended the race that we call asas, who inhab-
ited Asgard the old and the realms that lie about

it, and all that race are known to be gods. And
for this reason Odin is called Alfather, that he is

the father of all gods and men, and of all things
that were made by him and by his might. Jord

(earth) was his daughter and his wife ; with her

he begat his first son, and that is Asa-Thor. To
him was given force and strength, whereby he

conquers all things quick.
10. Norfe, or Narfe, hight a giant, who dwelt in

Jotunheim. He had a daughter by name Night.
She was swarthy and dark like the race she be-

longed to. She was first married to a man who

hight Naglfare. Their son was Aud. Afterward

she was married to Annar. Jord hight their

daughter. Her last husband was Delling (Bay-
break), who was of asa-race. Their son was Day,
who was light and fair after his father. Then
took Alfather Night and her son Day, gave them
two horses and two cars, and set them up in heaven
to drive around the earth, each in twelve hours

by turns. Night rides first on the horse which is
called Hrimfaxe, and every morning he bedews



66 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

the earth with the foam from his bit. The horse
on which Day rides is called Skinfaxe, and with
his mane he lights up all the sky and the earth.

11. Then said Ganglere: How does he steer
the course of the sun and the moon ? Answered
Har: Mundilfare hight the man who had two
children. They were so fair and beautiful that
he called his son Moon, and his daughter, whom
he gave in marriage to a man by name Glener,
he called Sun. But the gods became wroth at this

arrogance, took both the brother and the sister,
set them up in heaven, and made Sun drive the
horses that draw the car of the sun, which the

gods had made to light up the world from sparks
that flew out of Muspelheim. These horses hight
Arvak and Alsvid. Under their withers the

gods placed two wind-bags to cool them, but in

some songs it is called ironcold (isarnkol). Moon

guides the course of the moon, and rules its wax-

ing and waning. He took from the earth two

children, who hight Bil and Hjuke, as they were

going from the well called Byrger, and were

carrying on their shoulders the bucket called

Sager and the pole Simul. Their father's name

is Vidfin. These children always accompany

Moon, as can be seen from the earth.

12. Then said Ganglere : Swift fares Sun, almost

as if she were afraid, and she could make no more

haste in her course if she feared her destroyer.



TH Y. Pooling of gylfe. 67

Then answered Har: Nor is it wonderful that

she speeds with all her might. Near is he who

pursues her, and there is no escape for her but

to run before him. Then asked Ganglere : Who
causes her this toil ? Answered Har : It is two
wolves. The one liight Skol, he runs after her;
she fears him and he will one day overtake her.

The other hight Hate, Hrodvitner's son ; he

bounds before her and wants to catch the moon,
and so he will at last."^ Then asked Ganglere:
Whose offspring are these wolves? Said Har:
A hag dwells east of Midgard, in the forest called
Jarnved (Ironwood), where reside the witches

called Jarnvidjes. The old hag gives birth to

many giant sons, and all in wolf's likeness.
Thence come these two wolvea It is said that

of this wolf-race one is the mightiest, and is

called Moongarm. He is filled with the life-
blood of all dead men. He will devour the

moon, and stain the heavens and all the sky
with blood. Thereby the sun will be darkened,
the winds will grow wild, and roar hither and

thither, as it is said in the Prophecy of the Vala :

In the east dwells the old hag,
In the Jarnved forest;
And brings forth there
Fenrer's offspring.

There comes of them all
One the worst,

* That wolves follow the sun and moon, is a wide-spread popular
superstition. In Sweden, a parhelion is called Solvarg (sun-wolf).



68 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

The moon's devourer
In a troll's disguise.

He is filled with the life-blood
Of men doomed to die;
The seats of the gods
He stains with red gore;
Sunshine grows black

The summer thereafter,
All weather gets fickle.

Know you yet or not?*

13. Then asked Ganglere: What is the path
from earth to heaven? Har answered, laughing:
Foolishly do you now ask. Plave you not been
told that the gods made a bridge from earth to

heaven, which is called Bifrost ? You must have
seen it. It may be that you call it the rainbow.
It has three colors, is very strong, and is made

with more craft and skill than other structures.

Still, however strong it is, it will break when

the sons of Muspel come to ride over it, and then

they will have to swim their horses over great
rivers in order to get on. Then said Ganglere:
The gods did not, it seems to me, build that

bridge honestly, if it shall be able to break to

pieces, since they could have done so, had they
desired. Then made answer Har : The gods are

worthy of no blame for this structure. Bifrost

is indeed a good bridge, but there is no thing in

the world that is able to stand when the sons of

Muspel come to the fight.
* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 43, 44.



CHAPTER VI.

THE FIRST WORKS OF THE ASAS. THE GOLDEN AGE.

14. Then said Ganglere: What did Alfather
do when Asgard had been built? Said Har:
In the beginning he appointed rulers In a place
in the middle of the burg which is called Ida-

void, who were to judge with hini the disputes
of men and decide the affairs of the burg. Their
first work was to erect a court, where there were
seats for all the twelve, and, besides, a high-seat
for Alfather. That is the best and largest house

ever built on earth, and is within and without

like solid gold. This place is called Gladsheim.

Then they built another hall as a home for the

goddesses, which also is a very beautiful mansion,
and is called Vingolf Thereupon they built a

forge; made hammer, tongs, anvil, and with
these all other tools. Afterward they worked

in iron, stone and wood, and especially in that

metal which is called gold. All their household

wares were of gold. That age was called the

golden age, until it was lost by the coming of
those women from Jotunheim. Then the gods set
themselves in their high-seats and held counsel.



70 thp: younger edda.

They remembered how the dwarfs had quick-
ened in the mould of the earth like maggots in

flesh. The dwarfs had first been created and

had quickened in Ymer\s flesh, and were then

maggots ; but now, by the decision of the gods,
they got the understanding and likeness of men,
but still had to dwell in the eai'th and in rocks.

Modsogner was one dwarf and Durin another.

So it is said in the Vala's Prophecy :

Then went all the gods.
The all-holy gods,
On their judgment seats,
And thereon took counsel
Who should the race
Of dwarfs create

From the bloody sea
And from Blain's bones.
In the likeness of men
Made they many
Dwarfs in the earth,
As Durin said.

And these, says the Vala, are the names of the
dwarfs :

Nye, Nide,

Nordre, Sudre,

Austre, Vestre,

Althjof, Dvalin,

Na, Nain,

Niping, Dain,

Bifur, Bafur,

Bombor, Nore,

Ore, Onar,

Oin, Mjodvitner,

Vig, Gandalf.

Vindalf, Thorin.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 71

File, Kile,

Funclin, Vale,

Thro, Throin,

Thek, Lit, Vit,

Ny, Nyrad, ^
Rek, Radsvid.

But the following are also dwarfs and dwell

in the rocks, while the above-named dwell in the

mould :
Draupner, Dolgthvare,

Hor, Hugstare,

Hledjolf, Gloin,

Dore, Ore,

Duf, Andvare,

Hepte, File,

Har, Siar.

But the following come from Svarin's How to
Aurvang on Joruvold, and from them is sprung
Lovar. Their names are :

Skirfer, Virfir,

Skafid, Ae,

Alt", Inge,

Eikinskjalde,

Fal, Froste,

Fid, Ginnar.*

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 12, 14-16, 18, 19.



CHAPTER VII.

ON THE WONDERFUL THINGS IN HEAVEN.

15. Then said Ganglere: Where is the chief
or most holy place of the gods ? Har answered :

That is by the ash Ygdrasil. There the gods
meet in council every day. Said Ganglere: What
is said about this place? Answered Jafnhar:

This ash is the best and greatest of all trees ; its

branches spread over all the world, and reach

up above heaven. Three roots sustain the tree

and stand wide apart ; one root is with the asas

and another with the frost-giants, w^here Gin-

ungagap formerly was; the third reaches into

Niflheim
;
imder it is Hvergelmer, where Nidhug

gnaws the root from below. But under the

second root, which extends to the frost-giants,
is the well of Mimer, wherein knowledge and

wisdom are concealed. The owner of the well

hight Mimer. He is full of wisdom, for he drinks
from the well with the Gjallar-horn. Alfather

once came there and asked for a drink from the

well, but he did not get it before he left one

of his eyes as a pledge. So it is said in the

Vala's Prophecy:
72



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 73

Well know I, Odin,
Where you hid your eye:
In the crystal-clear
Well of Mimer.

Mead drinks Mimer

Every morning
From Valfather's pledge.
Know you yet or not?*

The third root of the ash is in heaven, and be-

neath it is the most sacred fountain of Urd. Here

the gods have their doomstead. The asas ride

hither every day over Bifrost, which is also called

Asa-bridge. The following are the names of the

horses of the gods : Sleipner is the best one ; he

belongs to Odin, and he has eight feet. The
second is Glad, the third Gyller, the fourth Gler,

the fifth Skeidbriraer, the sixth Silfertop, the

seventh Siner, the eighth Gisl, the ninth Falhof

ner, the tenth Gulltop, the eleventh Letfet. Bal-

der's horse was burned with him. Thor goes on

foot to the doomstead, and wades the following
rivers:

Kormt and Ormt
And the two Kerlaugs;
These shall Thor wade

Every day
When he goes to judge
Near the Ygdrasil ash;
For the Asa-bridge
Burns all ablaze,—
The holy waters roar.f

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 24.
t Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 29.

4



74 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Then asked Ganglere: Does fire burn over
Bifrost ? Har answered : The red which you see
in the rainbow is burning fire. The frost-giants
and the mountain-giants would go up to heaven

if Bifrost were passable for all who desired to go
there. Many fair places there are in heaven, and

they are all protected by a divine defense. There

stands a beautiful hall near the fountain beneath

the ash. Out of it come three maids, whose
names are Urd, Verdande and Skuld. These

maids shape the lives of men, and we call them
norns. Thei*e are yet more norns, namely those

who come to every man when he is born, to shape
his life, and these are known to be of the race of

gods; others, on the other hand, are of the race of

elves, and yet others are of the race of dwarfs.

As is here said :

Far asunder, I think,
The norns are born,

They are not of the same race.

Some are of the asas.
Some are of the elves,
Some are daughters of Dvalin.*

Then said Ganglere: If the norns rule the

fortunes of men, then they deal them out exceed-

ingly unevenly. Some live a good life and are

rich
;
some get neither wealth nor praise. Some

have- a long, others a short life. Har answered.

* Elder Edda: Fafner's Lay, 13.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 75

Good norns and of good descent shape good lives,
and when some men are weighed down with

misfortune, the evil norns are the cause of it.

16. Then said Ganglere: What other remark-
able things are there to be said about the ash ?

Har answered: Much is to be said about it. On
one of the boughs of the ash sits an eagle, who
knows many things. Between his eyes sits a
hawk that is called Vedfolner. A squirrel, by
name Ratatosk, springs up and down the tree,
and carries words of envy between the eagle and

Nidhug. Four stags leap about in the branches

of the ash and bite the leaves.* Their names are :

Dain, Dvalin, Duney and Durathro. In Hvergel-
mer with Nidhug are more serpents than tongue
can tell. As is here said :

The ash Ygdrasil
Bears distress

Greater than men know.

Stags bite it above,
At the side it rots,

Nidhug gnaws it below.

And so again it is said :

More serpents lie
'

' 'Neath the Ygdrasil ash

Than is thought of

By every foolish ape.
Goin and Moin

(They are sons of Grafvitner),

*The Icelandic barr. See Vigfusson, sub voce.



76 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Grabak and Grafvollud,
Ofner and Svafner

Must for aye, methinks,
Gnaw the roots of that tree.*

Again, it is said that the norns, that dwell in

the fountain of Urd, every day take water from

the fountain and take the clay that lies around

the fountain and sprinkle therewith the ash, in

order that its branches may not wither or decay.
This water is so holy that all things that are put
into the fountain beco'me as white as the film of

an egg-shell. As is here said:

An ash 1 know
Hight Ygdrasil;
A high, holy tree
With white clay sprinkled.
Thence come the dews

That fall in the dales.

Green forever it stands

Over Urd's fountain.f

The dew which falls on the earth from this
tree men call honey-fall, and it is the food of
bees. Two birds are fed in Urd's fountain

; they
are called swans, and they are the parents of the

race of swans.

17. Then said Ganglere: Great tidings you are

able to tell of the heavens. Are 'there other

remarkable places than the one by Urd's foun-

tain ? Answered Har : There are many magnifi-
* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 35. 34.
t Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 22.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 77

cent dwellings. One is there called Alfheim.
There dwell the folk that are called light-elves;
but the dark-elves dwell down in the earth, and

they are unlike the light-elves in appearance, but

much more so in deeds. The light-elves are fairer
than the sun to look upon, but the dark-elves

are blacker than pitch. Another place is called

Breidablik, and no place is fairer. There is also

a mansion called Glitner, of which the walls and

pillars and posts are of red gold, and the roof

is of silver. Furthermore, there is a dwelling, by
name Himinbjorg, which stands at the end of

heaven, where the Bifrost-bridge is united with

heaven. And there is a great dwelling called

Valaskjalf, which belongs to Odin. The gods
made it and thatched it with sheer silver. In
this hall is the high-seat, which is called Hlid-

skjalf, and when Alfather sits in this seat, he sees
over all the world. In the southern end of the

world is the palace, which is the fairest of all, and

brighter than the sun ; its name is Gimle. It
shall stand wh6n both heaven and earth shall
have passed aw^ay. In this hall the good and the

righteous shall dwell through all ages. Thus

says the Prophecy of the Vala:

A hall 1 know, standing
Than the sun fairer,
Than gold better,
Gimle by name.



78 THE YOUNGEK EDDA.

There shall good

People dwell,
And forever

Delights enjoy.*

Then said Ganglere: Who guards this palace
when Surt's fire burns up heaven and earth?
Har answered: It is said that to the south and

above this heaven is another heaven, which is

called Andlang. But there is a third, which is

above these, and is called Vidblain, and in this

heaven we believe this mansion (Gimle) to be
situated

;
but we deem that the light-elves alone

dwell in it now.

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 70.



CHAFPER VIII.

THE ASAS.

18. Then said Ganglere: Whence comes the
wind? It is so strong that it moves great seas,
and fans fires to fiame, and yet, strong as it is, it

cannot be seen. Therefore it is wonderfully
made. Then answered Har : That I can tell you
well. At the northern end of heaven sits a giant,
who hight Hrasvelg. He is clad in eagles' plumes,
and when he spreads his wings for flight, the
winds arise from under them. Thus is it here
said :

Hrasvelg hight he

Who sits at the end of heaven,
A giant in eagle's disguise.
From his wings, they say,
The wind does come
Over all mankind.*

1 9. Then said Ganglere : How comes it that
summer is so hot, but the winter so cold ? Har
answered: A wise man would not ask such a
question, for all are able to tell this ; but if you
alone have become so stupid that you have not

heard of it, then I would rather forgive you for

* Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 37.

79



80 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

asking unwisely once than that you should go

any longer in ignorance of what you ought to

know. Svasud is the name of him who is father
of summer, and he lives such a life of enjoyment,
that everything that is mild is from him called

sweet (svasligt). But the father of winter has

two names, Vindlone and Vindsval. He is the
son of Vasad, and all that race are grim and of

icy breath, and winter is like them.

20. Then asked Ganglere: Which are the

asas, in whom men are bound to believe ? Har
answered him : Twelve are the divine asas. Jafn-

har said : No less holy are the asynjes (goddesses),
nor is their power less. Then added Thride :

Odin is the highest and oldest of the asas. He
rules all things, but the other gods, each accord-

ing to his might, serve him as children a father.

Frigg is his wife, and she knows the fate of men,

although she tells not thereof, as it is related that

Odin himself said to Asa-Loke :

Mad are you, Loke!
And out of your senses;
Why do you not stop?
Fortunes all,

Methinks, Frigg knows,

Though she tells them not herself.*

Odin is called Alfather, for he is the father of

all the gods; he is also called Valfather, for all

* Elder Edda. Loke's Quarrel, 29, 47.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 81

wlio fall in fight are his chosen sons. For them

he prepares Valhal and Vingolf, where they are

called einherjes (heroes). He is also called

Hangagod, Haptagod, Farmagod; and he gave
himself still more names when he came to King
Geirrod :

Grim is my name,
And Ganglare,
Herjan, Hjalmbore,

Thek, Thride,

Thud, Ud,

Helblinde, Har,

Sad, Svipal,

Sangetal,

Herteifc, Hnikar,

Bileyg, Baleyg,

Bolverk, Fjolner,

Grimner, Glapsvid, Fjolsvid,

Sidhot, Sidskeg,

Sigfather, Hnikud,

Alfather, Atrid, Farmatyr,

Oske, Ome,

Jafnhar, Bifiinde,

Gondler, Harbard,

Svidur, Svidrir,

Jalk, Kjalar, Vidur,

Thro, Yg, Thund,

Vak, Skilfing,

Vafud, Hroptatyr,

Gaut, Veratyr.*

Then said Ganglere : A very great number of
names you have given him ; and this I know, for-

sooth, that he must be a very vnse man who is
able to understand and decide what chances are

* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 46-50.



82 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

the causes of all these names. Har answered:
Much knowledge is needed to explain it all

rightly, but still it is shortest to tell you that

most of these names have been given him for the

reason that, as there are many tongues in the

world, so all peoples thought they ought to turn

his name into their tongue, in order that they
might be able to worship him and pray to him

each in its own language. Other causes of
these names must be sought in his journeys,
which are told of in old sagas ; and you can lay
no claim to being called a wise man if you are
not able to tell of these wonderful adventures.

21. Then said Ganglere: What are the names
of the other asas ? What is their occupation, and
what works have they wrought ? Har answered :
Thor is the foremost of them. He is called Asa-

Thor, or Oku-Thor."^ He is the strongest of all

gods and men, and rules over the realm which

is called Thrudvang. His hall is called Bilskirner.

Therein are five hundred and forty floors, and it

is the largest house that men have made. Thus
it is said in Grimner's Lay :

Five hundred floors

And forty more,
Methinks, has bowed Bilskirner.

Of houses all
That I know roofed
I know my son's is the largest.f

* Oku is derived from the Finnish thunder-god, Ukko.
t Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 24.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 83

Thor has two goats, by name Tangnjost and

Tangrisner, and a chanot, wherein he drives. The

goats draw the chariot; wherefore he is called

Oku-Thor.* He possesses three valuable treas-
ures. One of them is the hammer Mjolner, which
the frost-giants and mountain-giants well know
when it is raised

;
and this is not to be wondered

at, for with it he has split many a skull of their
fathers or friends. The second treasure he pos-
sesses is Megin^arder (belt of strength) ; when
he girds himself wdth it his strength is doubled.

His third treasure that is of so great value is his

iron gloves ; these he cannot do without when he

lays hold of the hammer's haft. No one is so wise
that he can tell all his great works ; but I can

tell you so many tidings of him that it will grow
late before all is told that I know.

22. Thereupon said Ganglere: I wish to ask

tidings of more of the asas. Har gave him an-
swer; Odin's second son is Balder, and of him

good things are to be told. He is the best, and
all praise him. He is so fair of face and so bright
that rays of light issue from him ; and there is a

plant so white that it is likened unto Balder's

brow, and it is the whitest of all plants. From
this you can judge of the beauty both of his hair

and of his body. He is the wisest, mildest and

* The author of the Younger Edda is here mistaken. See note on
page 82.



84 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

most eloquent of all the asas; and such is his

nature that none can alter the judgment he has

pronounced. He inhabits the place in heaven
called Breidablik, and there nothing unclean can

enter. As is here said :

Breidablik it is called,

Where Balder has
Built for himself a hall

In the land

Where I know is found
The least of evil.*

23. The thii'd asa is he who is called Njord.
He dwells in Noatun, which is in heaven. He
rules the course of the wind and checks the fury
of the sea and of fire. He is invoked by sea-
farers and by fishermen. He is so rich and

wealthy that he can give broad lands and abun-

dance to those who call on him for them. He was
fostered in Vanaheim, but the vans f gave him as

a hostage to the gods, and received in his stead

as an asa-hostage the god whose name is Honer.

He established peace between the gods and vans.

Njord took to wife Skade, a daughter of the giant

Thjasse. She wished to live where her father had

dwelt, that is, on the mountains in Thrymheim ;

Njord, on the other hand, preferred to be near

the sea. They therefore agreed to pass nine

* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 13.
t Compare Vainamoinen, the son of Ukko, in the Finnish epic

Kalevala.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 85

nights in Thrymheim and three in Noatun. But

when Njord came back from the mountains to

Noatun he sang this :

Weary am I of the mountains,
Not long was I there,

Only nine nights.
The howl of the wolves

Methought sounded ill

To the song of the swans.

Skade then sang fchis :

Sleep I could not

On my sea-strand couch,
For the scream of the sea-fowl.

There wakes me.
As he comes from the sea.
Every morning the mew.

Then went Skade up on the mountain, and

-dwelt in Thrymheim. She often goes on skees

(snow-shoes), with her bow, and shoots wild

beasts. She is called skee-goddess or skee-dis.

Thus it is said :

Thrymheim it is called
Where Thjasse dwelt,
That mightiest giant.
But now dwells Skade,
Pure bride of the gods,
In her father's old homestead.*

24. Njord, in Noatun, afterward begat two

•children : a son, by name Fray, and a daughter,
by name Freyja. They were fair of face, and

Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 11.



86 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

mighty. Frey is the most famous of the asas.

He rules over rain and sunshine, and over . the
fruits of the earth. It is good to call on him for

harvests and peace. He also sways the wealth of
men. Freyja is the most famous of the goddesses.
She has in heaven a dwelling which is called

Folkvang, and when she rides to the battle, one
half of the slain belong to her, and the other half

to Odin. As is here said :

Folkvang it is called,
And there rules Freyja.
For the seats in the hall

Half of the slain

She chooses each day;
The other half is Odin's.*

Her hall is Sesrymner, and it is large and beau-
tiful. When she goes abroad, she drives in a car
drawn by two cats. She lends a favorable ear to
men who call upon her, and it is from her name
the title has come that women of birth and wealth
are called frur.f She is fond of love ditties, and

it is good to call on her in love affairs.

25. Then said Ganglere : Of great importance
these asas seem to me to be, and it is not wonder-
ful that you have great power, since you have

such excellent knowledge of the gods, and know
to which of them to address your prayers on each-

Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 14.
t Icel, fru {Ger. frail ; Dan. fnte), pi. frur, means a lady. It is

used of the wives of men of rank or title. It is derived from Freyja.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 87

occasion. But what other gods are there ? Har

answered : There is yet an asa, whose name is Tyr.
He is very daring and stout-hearted. He sways
victory in war, wherefore warriors should call on

him. There is a saw, that he who surpasses
others in bravery, and never yields, is Tyr-strong.
He is also so wise, that it is said of anyone who
is specially intelligent, that he is Tyr-learned. A
proof of his daring is, that when the asas induced

the wolf Fenrer to let himself be bound with the

chain Gleipner, he would not believe that they
would loose him again until Tyr put his hand in

his mouth as a pledge. But when the asas would

not loose the Fenris-wolf, he bit Tyr's hand off at

the place of the wolf's joint (the wrist; Icel.

iilflifir^).
From that time Tyr is one-handed, and

he is now called a peacemaker among men.
26. Brage is the name of another of the asas.

He is famous for his wisdom, eloquence and flow-

ing speech. He is a master-skald, and from him

song-craft is called brag (poetry), and such men

or women as distinguish themselves by their elo-

quence are called brag-men f and brag-women.

His wife is Idun. She keeps in a box those

* This etymology is, however, erroneous, for the word is derived
from oln or din, and the true form of the word is olnli^r = the ell-
joint (wrist); thus we have dlnhoge = the elbow; dln = alin (Gr.
<b8iv^ ;

Lat. ulna; cp. A.-S. el-boga; Eng. elbow) is the arm from

the elbow to the end of the middle finger, hence an ell in long
measure.

t Compare the Anglo-Saxon brego = itrmceTps, chief.



88 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

apples of whicli the gods eat when they grow
old, and then they become young again, and so
it will be until Ragnarok (the twilight of the

gods). Then said Ganglere : Of great importance
to the gods it must be, it seems to me, that Idun

preserves these apples with care and honesty.
Har answered, and laughed: They ran a great
risk on one occasion, whereof I might tell you
more, but you shall first hear the names of more

asas.

27. Heimdal is the name of one. He is also
called the white-asa. He is great and holy ; born
of nine maidens, all of whom were sisters. He
hight also Hallinskide and Gullintanne, for his

teeth were of gold. His horse hight Gulltop

(Gold-top). He dwells in a place called Himin-

bjorg, near Bifrost. He is the ward of the gods,
and sits at the end of heaven, guarding the

bridge against the mountain-giants. He needs
less sleep than a bird; sees an hundred miles

around him, and as well by night as by day. He
hears the grass grow and the wool on the backs
of the sheep, and of course all things that sound

louder than these. He has a trumpet called the

Gjallarhorn, and when he blows it it can be
heard in all the worlds. The head is called
Heimdal's sword. Thus it is here said :



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 89

Himinbjorg it is called,
Where Heimdal rules
Over his holy halls;
There drinks the ward of the gods
In his delightful dwelling
Glad the good mead.*

And again, in Heimdal's Song, lie says himself:

Son I am of maidens nine,
Bom I am of sisters nine.

28. Hoder higlit one of the asas, who is blind,
but exceedingly strong ; and the gods would wish

that this asa never needed to be named, for the

work of his hand will long be kept in memory
both by gods and men.

29. Vidar is the name of the silent asa. He
has a very thick shoe, and he is the strongest
next after Thor. From him the gods have much

help in all hard tasks.

30. Ale, or Vale, is the son of Odin and Rind.

He is daring in combat, and a good shot.
31. Uller is the name of one, who is a son of Sif,

and a step-son of Thor. He is so good an archer,
and so fast on his skees, that no one can contend

with him. He is fair of face, and possesses every
quality of a warrior. Men should invoke him in

single combat.

32. Forsete is a son of Balder and Nanna, Nep's

•daughter. He has in heaven the hall which hight
* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 13.



90 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Glitner. All who come to him with disputes go
away perfectly reconciled. No better tribunal is
to be found among gods and men. Thus it is
here said :

Glitner hight the hall,

On gold pillars standing,
And roofed with silver.
There dwells Forsete

Throughout all time,
And settles all disputes.*

Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 15.



CHAPTER IX.

LOKE AND HIS OFFSPRING.

33. There is yet one who is numbered among
the asas, but whom some call the backbiter of the
asas. He is the originator of deceit, and the dis-

grace of all gods and men. His name is Loke, or

Lopt. His father is the giant Farbaute, but his

mother's name is Laufey, or Nal. His brothers are

Byleist and Helblinde. Loke is fair and beauti-

ful of face, but evil in disposition, and very fickle-

minded. He surpasses other men in the craft
called cunning, and cheats in all things. He has
often l^rought the asas into great trouble, and

often helped them out again, with his cunning
contrivances. His wife hight Sygin, and their

son, Nare, or Narfe.

34. Loke had yet more children. A giantess
in Jotunheim, hight Angerboda. With her he be-

gat three children. The first was the Fenris-wolf ;
the second, Jormungand, that is, the Midgard-

serpent, and the third, Hel. When the gods knew
that these three children w^ere being fostered in

Jotunheim, and were aware of the prophecies that

much woe and misfortune would thence come to



92 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

them, and considering that much evil might be
looked for from them on their mother's side, and
still more on their father's, Alfather sent some of

the gods to take the children and bring them to

him. When they came to him he threw the ser-
pent into the deep sea which surrounds all lands.

There waxed the serpent so that he lies in the
midst of the ocean, surrounds all the earth, and

bites his own tail. Hel he cast into Nillheim,
and gave her power over nine worlds,* that she

should appoint abodes to them that are sent to

her, namely, those who die from sickness or old

age. She has there a great mansion, and the

walls around it are of strange height, and the

gates are huge. Eljudner is the name of her
hall. Her table hight famine ; her knife, starva-
tion. Her man-servant's name is Ganglate ; her

maid-servant's, Ganglot.f Her threshold i^ called

stumbling-block; her bed, care; the precious

hangings of her bed, gleaming bale. One-half of

her is blue, and the other half is of the hue of

flesh
;
hence she is easily known. Her looks are

very stern and grim.
35. The wolf was fostered by the asas at home,

and Tyr was the only one who had the courage to

go to him and give him food. When the gods
*
Possibly this ought to read the ninth world, which would cor-

respond with what we read on page 72, and in the Vala's Prophecy.
See also notes. It may be a mistake of the transcriber.

fBoth these words mean sloth.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 93

saw how mucli lie grew every day, and all proph-
ecies declared that he was predestined to become

fatal to them, they resolved to make a very strong
fetter, which they called Lading. They brought
it to the wolf, and bade him try his strength on

the fetter. The wolf, who did not think it would
be too strong for him, let them do therewith as

they pleased. But as soon as he spurned against
it the fetter burst asunder, and he was free from

Lading. Then the asas made another fetter, by
one-half stronger, and this they called Drome.

They wanted the wolf to try this also, saying to

him that he would become very famous for his

strength, if so strong a chain was not able to

hold him. The wolf thought that this fetter was

indeed very strong, but also that his strength
had increased since he broke Lading. He also
took into consideration that it was necessary to

expose one's self to some danger if he desired to

become famous; so he let them put the fetter

on him. When the asas said they were ready,
the wolf shook himself, spurned against and

dashed the fetter on the ground, so that the

broken pieces flew a long distance. Thus he

broke loose out of Drome. Since then it has been

held as a proverb,
"
to get loose out of Lading

"

or "to dash out of Drome,'' whenever anything
is extraordinarily hard. The asas now began to
fear that they would not get the wolf bound.



94 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

So Alfather sent the youth, who is called Skirner,
and is Frey's messenger, to some dwarfs in Sv^ar-

talfaheim, and had them make the fetter which
is called Gleipner. It was made of six things:
of the footfall of cats, of the beard of woman,
of the roots of the mountain, of the sinews of the

bear, of the breath of the fish, and of the spittle
of the birds. If you have not known this before,
you can easily find out that it is true and that

there is no lie about it, since you must have ob-

served that a woman has no beard, that a cat's
footfall cannot be heard, and that mountains have

no roots
;
and I know, forsooth, that what I have

told you is perfectly true, although there are

some things that you do not understand. Then

said Ganglere : This I must surely understand to

be true. I can see these things which you have

taken as proof But how was the fetter smithied ?
Answered Har : That I can well explain to you.
It was smooth and soft as a silken string. How

strong and trusty it was you shall now hear.
When the fetter was brought to the asas, they
thanked the messenger for doing his errand so

well. Then they went out into the lake called

Amsvartner, to the holm (rocky island) called

Lyngve, and called the wolf to go with them.

They showed him the silken band and bade him

break it, saying that it was somewhat stronger
than its thinness would lead one to suppose.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 95

Then they handed it from one to the other and

tried its strength with their hands, but it did not

break. Still they said the wolf would be able

to snap it. The wolf answered : It seems to me
that I will get no fame though I break asunder

so slender a thread as this is. But if it is made
with craft and guile, then, little though it may
look, that band will never come on my feet. Then
said the asas that he would easily be able to

break a slim silken band, since he had already
burst large iron fetters asunder. But even if

you are unable to break this band, you have

nothing to fear from the gods, for we will im-

mediately loose you again. The wolf answered:
If you get me bound so fast that I am not able
to loose myself again, you will skulk away, and

it will be long before I get any help from you,
wherefore I am loth to let this band be laid
on me

;
but in order that you may not accuse me

of cowardice, let some one of you lay his hand
in my mouth as a pledge that this is done with-
out deceit. The one asa looked at the other, and

thought there now was a choice of two evils, and
no one would offer his hand, before Tyr held out
his right hand and laid it in the wolf's mouth.

But when the wolf now began to spurn against
it the band grew stiffer, and the more he strained

the tighter it got. They all laughed except Tyr;
he lost his hand. When the asas saw that the



96 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

wolf was sufficiently well bound, they took tlie

cliain whicli was fixed to the fetter, and which

was called Gelgja, and drew it through a large
rock which is called Gjol, and fastened this rock

deep down in the earth. Then they took a large
stone, which is called Tvite, and drove it still

deeper into the ground, and used this stone for

a fastening-pin. The wolf opened his mouth

terribly wide, raged and twisted himself with all

his might, and wanted to bite them; but they

put a sword in his mouth, in such a manner that

the hilt stood in his lower jaw and the point in

the upper, that is his gag. He howls terribly,
and the saliva which runs from his mouth forms

a river called Von. There he will lie until Ragna-
rok. Then said Ganglere: Very bad are these

children of Loke, but they are strong and mighty.
But why did not the asas kill the wolf when

they have evil to expect from him? Har an-

swered : So great respect have the gods for their

holiness and peace-stead, that they would not

stain them with the blood of the wolf, though

prophecies foretell that he must become the bane

of Odin.



CHAPTEE X.

THE GODDESSES (ASYNJES).

36. Ganglere asked: Whicli are the goddesses ?

Har answered: Frigg is the first; she possesses
the right lordly dwelling which is called Fen-

saler. The second is Saga, who dwells in Sokva-

bek, and this is a large dwelling. The third is

Eir, who is the best leech. The fourth is Gefjun,
who is a may, and those who die maids become
her hand-maidens. The fifth is Fulla, who is also
a may, she wears her hair flowing and has a

golden ribbon about her head ; she carries Frigg's

chest, takes care of her shoes and knows her

secrets. The sixth is Freyja, who is ranked with

Frigg. She is wedded to the man whose name is

Oder; their daughter's name is Hnos, and she is
so fair that all things fair and precious are called,
from her name, Hnos. Oder went far away. Freyja

weeps for him, but her tears are red gold. Freyja
has many names, and the reason therefor is that
she changed her name among the various nations
to w^hich she came in search of Oder. She is called

Mardol, Horn, Gefn, and Syr. She has the neck-

lace Brising, and she is called Vanadis. The
97



98 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

seventh is Sjofa, who is fond of turning men's
and women's hearts to love, and it is from her

name that love is called Sjafne. The eighth is

Lofn, who is kind and good to those who call

upon her, and she has permission from Alfather

or Frigg to bring together men and women, no
matter what difficulties may stand in the way;
therefore

"
love

"
is so called from her name, and

also that which is much loved by men. The
ainth is Var. She hears the oaths and troths

that men and women plight to each other. Hence
.-^uch vows are called vars, and she takes vengeance
on those who break their promises. The tenth
is Vor, who is so wise and searching that nothing
can be concealed from her. It is a saying that

a woman becomes vor (ware) of what she be-
comes wise. The eleventh is Syn, who guards the
door of the hall, and closes it against those who
are not to enter. In trials she guards those suits

in which anyone tries to make use of falsehood.
Hence is the saying that

"
syn is set against it,"

when anyone tries to deny ought. The twelfth

is Hlin, who guards those men whom Frigg wants
to protect from any danger. Hence is the saying
that he hlins who is forewarned. The thirteenth
is Snotra, who is wise and courtly. After her,
men and women who are mse are called Snotras.
The fourteenth is Gna, whom Frigg sends on her
errands into various worlds. She rides upon a



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 99

horse called Hofvarpner, tliat runs through the

air and over the sea. Once, when she was riding,
some vans saw her faring through the air. Then

said one of them :

What flies there?
What fares there?
What glides in the air?

She answered

I fly not,

Though I fare
And glide through the air
On Hofvarpner,
That Hamskerper,

Begat with Gardrofa.*

From Gna's name it is said that anything that
fares high in the air gnas. Sol and Bil are num-

bered among the goddesses, but their nature has

already been described.f
37. There are still others who are to serve in

Valhal, bear the drink around, wait upon the

table and pass the ale-horns. Thus they are

named in Grimner's Lay:
Hrist and Mist
I want my horn to bring to me;
Skeggold and Skogul,
Hild and Thrud,
Hlok and Herfjoter,
Gol and Geirahod,

Randgrid and Radgrid,
And Reginleif;
These bear ale to the einherjes.t

* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 86.
t See page 66.
i Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 36.



100 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

These are called valkyries. Odin sends them

to all battles, where they choose those who are
to be slain, and rule over the victory. Gud and

Rosta, and the youngest norn, Skuld, always ride

to sway the battle and choose the slain. Jord,
the mother of Thor, and Rind, Vale's mother, are

numbered among the goddesses.



CHAPTER XL

THE GIANTESS GERD AND SKIRNER'S JOURNEY.*

38. Gymer higlit a man whose wife was Orbo-

da, of the race of the mountain giants. Their

daughter was Gerd, the fairest of all women.

One day when Frey had gone into Hlidskjalf,
and was looking out upon all the worlds, he saw

toward the north a hamlet wherein was a large
and beautiful house. To this house went a

woman, and when she raised her hands to open
the door, both the sky and the sea glistened

therefrom, and she made all the world bright. As
a punishment for his audacity in seating himself

in that holy seat, Frey went away full of grief.
When he came home, he neither spake, slept,
nor drank, and no one dared speak to him. Then

Njord sent for Skirner, Frey's servant, bade him

go to Frey and ask him with whom he was so

angry, since he would speak to nobody. Skirner

said that he would go, though he was loth to

do so, as it was probable that he would get evil

words in reply. When he came to Frey and
asked him why he was so sad that he would not

*This is the Nibluncr story in a nut-shell.

101



102 THE YOUNGEK EDDA.

talk, Frey answered that he had seen a beautiful

woman, and for her sake he had become so filled
with

grief, that he could not live any longer if
he could not get her. And now you must go,
he added, and ask her hand for me and bring
her home to me, whether it be with or without
the consent of her father. I will reward you well
for your trouble. Skirner answered saying that

he would go on this errand, but Frey must give
him his sword, that was so excellent that it
wielded itself in fight Frey made no objection
to this and gave him the sword. Skirner went
on his journey, courted Gerd for him, and got
the promise of her that she nine nights there-

after should come to Bar-Isle and there have

her wedding with Frey. When Skirner came
back and gave an account of his journey, Frey
said :

Long is one night,
Long are two nights,
How can I hold out three?
Oft to me one month
Seemed less
Than this half night of love.*

This is the reason why Frey was unarmed when
he fought with Bele, and slew him with a hart's

horn. Then said Ganglere : It is a great wonder
that such a lord as Frey would give away his

sword, when he did not have another as good.

Elder Edda: Skimer's Journey, 42.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 103

A great loss it was to Mm wlien lie fought with
Bele; and this I know, forsooth, that he must

have repented of that gift. Har answered: Of

no great account was his meeting with Bele.

Frey could have slain him with his hand. But

the time will come when he will find himself in

a worse plight for not having his sword, and that

will be when the sons of Muspel sally forth to

the fight.



CHAPTER XII.

LIFE IN VALHAL.

39. Then said Ganglere : You say that all men
who since the beginning of the world have fallen
in battle have come to Odin in Valhal. What
does he have to give them to eat? It seems to
me there must be a great throng of people. Har
answered : It is truej as you remark, that there
is a great throng; many more are yet to come

there, and still they will be thought too few

when the wolf* comes. But however great may
be the throng in Valhal, they will get plenty
of flesh of the boar Sahrimner. He is boiled

every day and is whole again in the evening.
But as to the question you just asked, it seems
to me there are but few men so wise that

they are able to answer it correctly. The cook's
name is Andhrimner, and the kettle is called
Eldhrimner, as is here said :

Andhrimner cooks
In Eldhrimner

Sahrimner.

Tis the best of flesh.

There are few who know
What the einherjes eat.f

* The Fenris-wolf in Ragnarok.
t Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 18.

104



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 105

Ganglere asked ; Does Odin have tlie same kind

of food as tlie einkerjes ? Har answered : The food

that is placed on kis table ke gives to kis two

wolves, wkick kigkt Gere and Freke. He needs
no food kimself. Wine is to kim botk food and

drink, as is kere said :

Gere and Freke

Sates the warfaring,

Famous father of hosts;
But on wine alone

Odin in arms renowned

Forever lives.*

Two ravens sit on Odin's skoulders, and bring
to kis ears all tkat tkey kear and see. Tkeir names

are Hugin and Munin. At dawn ke sends tkem
out to fly over tke wkole world, and tkey come

back at breakfast time. Tkus ke gets informa-

tion about many tkings, and kence ke is called

Rafnagud (raven-god). As is kere said :

Hugin and Munin

Fly every day
Over the great earth.

I fear for Hugin
That he may not return,
Yet more am 1 anxious for Munin.f

40. Tken asked Ganglere : Wkat do tke ein-

kerjes kave to drink tkat is furnisked tkem as

bountifully as tke food ? Or do tkey drink w^ater ?
Har answered: Tkat is a wonderful question.

Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 19.
t Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 20.



106 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Do you suppose that Alfather invites kings, jarls,
or other great men, and gives them water to drink ?
This I know, forsooth, that many a one comes
to Valhal who would think he was paying a big
price for his water-drink, if there were no better

reception to be found there,
—

persons, namely,
who have died from wounds and pain. But I
can tell you other tidings. A she-goat, by name
Heidrun, stands up in Valhal and bites the leaves
off the branches of that famous tree called Lerad.

From her teats runs so much mead that she fills

every day a vessel in the hall from which the

horns are filled, and which is so large that all

the einherjes get all the drink they want out
of it. Then said Ganglere : That is a most useful

goat, and a right excellent tree that must be that

she feeds upon. Then said Har: Still more re-
markable is the hart Eikthyrner, which stands over

Valhal and bites the branches of the same tree.

From his horns fall so many drops down into

Hvergelmer, that thence flow the rivers that are

called Sid, Vid, Sekin, Ekin, Svol, Gunthro, Fjorm,

Fimbulthul, Gipul, Gopul, Gomul and Geirvimul,
all of which fall about the abodes of the asas.

The following are also named : Thyn, Vin, Thol,

Bol, Grad, Gunthrain, Nyt, Not, Non, Hron, Vina,

Vegsvin, Thjodnuma.
41. Then said Ganglere: That was a wonder-

ful tiding that you now told me. A mighty



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE, 107

house must Valhal be, and a great crowd there

must often be at the door. Then answered Har :

Why do you not ask how many doors there are
in Valhal, and how large they are? When you
find that out, you will confess that it would rather

be wonderful if everybody could not easily go in

and out. It is also a fact that it is no more

difficult to find room within than to get in. Of

this you may hear what the Lay of Grimner says:

Five hundred doors

And forty more,
I trow, there are in Valhal.

Eight hundred einherjes
Go at a time through one door
When they fare to fight with the wolf.*

42. Then said Ganglere: A mighty band of
men there is in Valhal, and, forsooth, I know that
Odin is a very great chief, since he commands

so mighty a host. But what is the pastime of the

einherjes when they do not drink ? Har answered :

Every morning, when they have dressed them-

selves, they take their weapons and go out into

the court and fight and slay each other. That

is their play. Toward breakfast-time they ride

home to Valhal and sit down to drink. As is
here said :

All the einherjes
In Odin's court

Hew daily each other.

* Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 23.



108 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

They choose the slain
And ride from the battle-field,
Then sit they in peace together.*

But true it is, as you said, that Odin is a great
chief. There are many proofs of that. Thus it
is said in the very words of the asas themselves :

The Ygdrasil ash

Is the foremost of trees,

But Skidbladner of ships,
Odin of asas,

Sleipner of steeds,

Bifrost of bridges,

Brage of Skalds,
Habrok of hows,
But Garm of dogs.f

* Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 41.
t Elder Edda: Grimner's Lay, 44.



CHAPTER XIII.

ODIN'S HORSE AND FREY'S SHIP.

43. Ganglere asked: Whose is that horse

Sleipner, and what is there to say about it?

Har answered : You have no knowledge of Sleip
ner, nor do you know the circumstances attending
his birth; but it must seem to you worth the

telling.
In the beginning, when the town of the

gods was building, when the gods had estab-

lished Midgard and made Valhal, there came

a certain builder and offered to make them
a burg, in three half years, so excellent that

it should be perfectly safe against the mountain-

giants and frost-giants, even though they should

get within Midgard. But he demanded as his

reward, that he should have Freyja, and he

wanted the sun and moon besides. Then the

asas came together and held counsel, and the

bargain was made with the builder that he

should get what he demanded if he could get the

burg done in one winter ; but if on the first day
of summer any part of the burg was unfinished,
then the contract should be void. It was also

agreed that no man should help him with the
work. When they told him these terms, he re-



110 THE YOUNGEK EDDA.

quested that they should allow him to have the

help of his horse, called Svadilfare, and at the

suggestion of Loke this was granted him.

On the first day of winter he began to build
the burg, but by night he hauled stone for it with

his horse. But it seemed a great wonder to

the asas what great rocks that horse drew, and

the horse did one half more of the mighty task

than the builder. The bargain was firmly estab-

lished with witnesses and oaths, for the giant
did not deem it safe to be among the asas without

truce if Thor should come home, who now was
on a journey to the east fighting trolls. Toward

the end of winter the burg was far built, and

it was so high and strong that it could in nowise

be taken. When there were three days left
before summer, the work was all completed ex-

cepting the burg gate. Then went the gods to

their judgment-seats and held counsel, and asked

each other who could have advised to give Freyja
in marriage in Jotunheim, or to plunge the air

and the heavens in darkness by taking away the

sun and the moon and giving them to the

giant; and all agreed that this must have been

advised by him who gives the most bad counsels,

namely, Loke, son of Laufey, and they threatened

him with a cruel death if he could not contrive

some way of preventing the builder from ful-

filling
his part of the bargain, and they pro-



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. Ill

ceeded to lay hands on Loke. He in his fright
then promised with an oath that he should so

manage that the builder should lose his wages,
let it cost him what it would. And the same

evening, when the builder drove out after stone
with his horse Svadilfare, a mare suddenly ran

out of the woods to the horse and began to neigh
at him. The steed, knowing what sort of horse
this was, grew excited, burst the reins asunder and

ran after the mare, but she ran from him into the

woods. The builder hurried after them with all
his might, and wanted to catch the steed, but

these horses kept running all night, and thus the

time was lost, and at dawn the work had not
made the usual progress. When the builder saw
that his work was not going to be completed, he
resumed his giant form. When the asas thus
became sure that it was really a mountain-giant
that had come among them, they did not heed
their oaths, but called on Thor. He came

straightway, swung his hammer, Mjolner, and

paid the workman his wages,
— not with the sun

and moon, but rather by preventing him from

dwelling in Jotunheim ; and this was easily done

with the first blow of the hammer, which broke
his skull into small pieces and sent him down
to Niflhel. But Loke had run such a race with
Svadilfare that he some time after bore a foal.

It was gray, and had eight feet, and this is the



112 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

best horse among gods and men. Thus it is said
in the Vala's Prophecy :

Then went the gods,
The most holy gods,
Onto their judgment-seats,
And counseled together
Who all the air
With guile had blended
Or to the giant race
Oder's may had given.
Broken were oaths.
And words and promises,—
All mighty speech
That had passed between them.
Thor alon£ did this,
Swollen with anger.
Seldom sits he still

When such things he hears.*

44. Then asked Ganglere : What is there to be
said of Skidbladner, which you say is the best of

ships ? Is there no ship equally good, or equally

great? Made answer Har: Skidbladner is the
best of ships, and is made with the finest work-

manship ; but Naglfare, which is in Muspel, is the

largest. Some dwarfs, the sons of Ivalde, made
Skidbladner and gave it to Frey. It is so large
that all the asas, with their weapons and war-gear,
can find room on board it, and as soon as the sails

are hoisted it has fair wind, no matter whither it

is going. When it is not wanted for a voyage, it
is made of so many pieces and with so much skill,
that Frey can fold it together like a napkin and

carry it in his pocket.
* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 29, 30.



CHAPTER XIV.

THOR'S ADVENTURES.

Then said Ganglere: A good ship is Skid-
bladner, but much black art must have been re-
sorted to ere it was so fashioned. Has Thor never
come v^here he has found anything so strong and

mighty that it has been superior to him either
in strength or in the black art ? Har ansv^ered :
Few men, I know, are able to tell thereof, but
still he has often been in difficult straits. But

though there have been things so mighty and

strong that Thor has not been able to gain the

victory, they are such as ought not to be spoken

of; for there are many proofs which all must

accept that Thor is the mightiest. Then said

Ganglere : It seems to me that I have now asked
about something that no one can answer. Said

Jafnhar : We have heard tell of adventures that
seem to us incredible, but here sits one near who
is able to tell true tidings thereof, and you may
believe that he will not lie for the first time now,
who never told a lie before. Then said Ganglere :
I will stand here and listen, to see if any answer

is to be had to this question. But if you cannot
113



114 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

answer my question I declare you to be defeated.
Then answered Thride : It is evident that he now
is bound to know, though it does not seem proper
for us to speak thereof The beginning of this

adventure is that Oku-Thor went on a journey
with his goats and chariot, and with him went

the asa who is called Loke. In the evening they
came to a bonde* and got there lodgings for the

night. In the evening Thor took his goats and

killed them both, whereupon he had them flayed
and borne into a kettle. When the flesh was
boiled, Thor and his companion sat down to sup-
per. Thor invited the bonde, his wife and their

children, a son by name Thjalfe, and a daughter
by name Roskva, to eat with them. Then Thor

laid the goat-skins away from the fire-place, and

requested the bonde and his household to cast

the bones onto the skins. Thjalfe, the bonde's

son, had the thigh of one of the goats, which he

broke asunder with his knife, in order to get at

the marrow, Thor remained there over night.
In the morning, just before daybreak, he arose,
dressed himself, took the hammer Mjolner, lifted
it and hallowed the goat-skins. Then the goats
arose, but one of them limped on one of its hind

legs. When Thor saw this he said that either
the bonde or one of his folk had not dealt skill-

fully with the goat's bones, for he noticed that

* Bonde = peasant.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 115

the thigli was broken. It is not necessary to

dwell on this part of the story. All can under-

stand how frightened the bonde became when
he saw that Thor let his brows sink down over
his eyes. When he saw his eyes he thought
he must fall down at the sight of them alone.
Thor took hold of the handle of his hammer
so hard that his knuckles grew white. As might
be expected, the bonde and all his household

cried aloud and sued for peace, offering him

as an atonement all that they possessed. When
he saw their fear, his wrath left him. He was

appeased, and took as a ransom the bonde's

children, Thjalfe and Roskva. They became his

servants, and have always accompanied him since

that time.

46. He left his goats there and went on his

way east into Jotunheim, clear to the sea, and
then he went on across the deep ocean, and went

ashore on the other side, together with Loke and

Thjalfe and Roskva. When they had proceeded
a short distance, there stood before them a great
wood, through which they kept going the whole

day until dark. Thjalfe, who was of all men
the fleetest of foot, bore Thor's bag, but the

wood was no good place for provisions. When
it had become dark, they sought a place for

their night lodging, and found a very large hall.

At the end of it was a door as wide as the



116 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

hall. Here they remained through the night.
About midnight there was a great earthquake;
the ground trembled beneath them, and the

house shook. Then Thor stood up and called
his companions. They looked about them and
found an adjoining room to the right, in the

midst of the hall, and there they went in. Thor

seated himself in the door; the others went

farther in and were very much frightened. Thor
held his hammer by the handle, ready to defend
himself Then they heard a great groaning and

roaring. When it began to dawn, Thor went out
and saw a man lying not far from him in the
wood. He was very large, lay sleeping, and
snored loudly. Then Thor thought he had found

out what noise it was that they had heard in the

night. He girded himself with his Megin^arder,
whereby his asa-might increased. Meanwhile the

man woke, and immediately arose. It is said
that Thor this once forbore to strike him with

the hammer, and asked him for his name. He
called himself Skrymer; but, said he, I do not

need to ask you what your name is,
—I know

that you are Asa-Thor. But what have you done

with my glove? He stretched out his hand
and picked up his glove. Then Thor saw that

the glove was the hall in which he had spent the

night, and that the adjoining room was the

thumb of the glove. Skrymer asked whether



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 117

they would accept of his company. Thor said

yes. Skrymer took and loosed his provision-sack
and began to eat his breakfast ; but Thor and his

fellows did the same in another place. Skrymer

proposed that they should lay their store of

provisions together, to which Thor consented.

Then Skrymer bound all their provisions into

one bag, laid it on his back, and led the way
all the day, taking gigantic strides. Late in

the evening he sought out a place for their night

quarters under a large oak; Then Skrymer said

to Thor that he wanted to lie down to sleep;
they might take the provision-sack and make

ready their supper. Then Skrymer fell asleep and

snored tremendously. When Thor took the provi-
sion-sack and was to open it, then happened what

seems incredible, but still it must be told,
—

that he could not get one knot loosened, nor

could he stir a single end of the strings so that

it was looser than before. When he saw that all
his efforts were in vain he became wroth, seized

his hammer Mjolner with both his hands, stepped
with one foot forward to where Skrymer was

lying and dashed the hammer at his head. Skry-
mer awoke and asked whether some leaf had

fallen upon his head ; whether they had taken

their supper, and were ready to go to sleep.
Thor answered that they were just going to sleep.
Then they went under another oak. But the



118 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

truth must be told, that there was no fearless

sleeping. About midnight Thor heard that Skry-
mer was snoring and sleeping so fast that it
thundered in the wood. He arose and went over
to him, clutched the hammer tight and hard, and

gave him a blow in the middle of the crown,
so that he knew that the head of the hammer
sank deep into his head. But just then Skrymer
awoke and asked : What is that ? Did an acorn
fall onto my head ? How is it with you, Thor ?
Thor hastened back, answered that he had

just waked up, and said that it was midnight
and still time to sleep. Then Thor made up his
mind that if he could get a chance to give
him the third blow, he should never see him

again, and he now lay watching for Skrymer
to sleep fast. Shortly before daybreak he heard

that Skrymer had fallen asleep. So he arose and

ran over to him. He clutched the hammer with
all his might and dashed it at his temples, which

he saw uppermost. The hammer sank up to the
handle. Skrymer sat up, stroked his temples, and

said: Are there any birds sitting in the tree

above me? Methought, as I awoke, that some
moss from the branches fell on my head. What !
are you awake, Thor ? It is now time to get up
and dress

;
but you have not far left to the burg

that is called Utgard. I have heard that you
have been whispering among yourselves that I



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 119

am not small of stature, but you will see greater
men when you come to Utgard. Now I will give
you wholesome advice. Do not brag too mucli
of yourselves, for Utgard-Loke's thanes will not

brook the boasting of such insignificant little

fellows as you are ; otherwise turn back, and that

is, in fact, the best thing for you to do. But if

you are bound to continue your journey, then

keep straight on eastward ; my way lies to the
north, to those mountains that you there see.

Skrymer then took the provision-sack and threw

it on his back, and, leaving them, turned into the

wood, and it has not been learned whether the

asas wished to meet him again in health.

47. Thor and his companions went their way
and continued their journey until noom Then

they saw a burg standing on a plain, and it was

so high that they had to bend their necks clear

back before they could look over it. They drew
nearer and came to the burg-gate, which was

closed. Thor finding himself unable to open it,
and being anxious to get within the burg, they

crept between the bars and so came in. They
discovered a large hall and went to it. Finding the

door open they entered, and saw there many men,
the most of whom were immensely large, sitting
on two benches. Thereupon they approached the

king, Utgard-Loke, and greeted him. He scarcely
deigned to look at them, smiled scornfully and



120 THE YOUNGEK EDDA.

showed Ms teeth, saying: It is late to ask for

tidings of a long journey, but if I am not mis-
taken this stripling is Oku-Thor, is it not? It

may be, however, that you are really bigger than

you look. For what feats are you and your

companions prepared? No one can stay with
us here, unless he is skilled in some craft or ac-

complishment beyond the most of men. Then
answered he who came in last, namely Loke : I
know the feat of which I am prepared to give
proof, that there is no one present who can eat
his food faster than I. Then said Utgard-Loke :

That is a feat, indeed, if you can keep your word,
and you shall try it immediately. He then sum-
moned from the bench a man by name Loge, and

requested him to come out on the floor and try
his strength against Loke. They took a trough
full of meat and set it on the floor, whereupon
Loke seated himself at one end and Loge at the

other. Both ate as fast as they could, and met

at the middle of the trough. Loke had eaten all

the flesh off from the bones, but Loge had con-

sumed both the flesh and the bones, and the

trough too. All agreed that Loke had lost the

wager. Then Utgard-Loke asked what game that

young man knew? Thjalfe answered that he
would try to run a race with anyone that Utgard-
Loke might designate. Utgard-Loke said this

was a good feat, and added that it was to be



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 121

hoped that he excelled in swiftness if he expected
to win in this game, but he would soon have the

matter decided. He arose and went out. There
was an excellent race-course along the flat plain.

Utgard-Loke then summoned a young man, whose
name was Huge, and bade him run a race with

Thjalfe. Then they took the first heat, and Huge
was so much ahead that when he turned at
the goal he met Thjalfe. Said Utgard-Loke:
You must lay yourself more forward, Thjalfe, if

you want to win the race; but this I confess,
that there has never before come anyone hither

who was swifter of foot than you. Then they
took a second heat, and when Huge came to the

goal and turned, there was a long bolt-shot to

Thjalfe. Then said Utgard-Loke : Thjalfe seems
to me to run well

;
still I scarcely think he will

win the race, but this will be proven when they
run the third heat. Then they took one more
heat. Huge ran to the goal and turned back,
but Thjalfe had not yet gotten to the middle
of the course. Then all said that this game had
been tried sufficiently. Utgard-Loke now asked
Thor what feats there were that he would be

willing to exhibit before them, corresponding to

the tales that men tell of his great works. Thor

replied that he preferred to compete with some-

one in drinking. Utgard-Loke said there would
be no objection to this. He went into the hall,



122 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

called his cup-bearer, and requested him to take

the sconce-horn that his thanes were wont to

drink from. The cup-bearer immediately brought
forward the horn and handed it to Thor. Said

Utgard-Loke : From this horn it is thought to be
well drunk if it is emptied in one draught, some

men empty it in two draughts, but there is no
drinker so wretched that he cannot exhaust it in

three. Thor looked at the horn and did not

think it was very large, though it seemed pretty

long, but he was very thirsty. He put it to his

lips and swallowed with all his might, thinking
that he should not have to bend over the horn

a second time. But when his breath gave out,
and he looked into the horn to see how it had

gone with his drinking, it seemed to him difficult

to determine whether there was less in it than

before. Then said Utgard-Loke: That is well

drunk, still it is not very much. I could never

have believed it, if anyone had told me, that Asa-

Thor could not drink more, but I know you will
be able to empty it in a second draught. Thor

did not answer, but set the horn to his lips, think-

ing that he would now take a larger draught.
He drank as long as he could and drank deep, as
he was wont, but still he could not make the tip
of the horn come up as much as he would like.

And when he set the horn away and looked into

it,
it seemed to him that he had drunk less than



THE FOOLma OF GYLFE. 123

the first time
;
but the horn could now be borne

without spilling. Then said Utgard-Loke : How
now, Thor ! Are you not leaving more for the
third draught than befits your skill ? It seems to

me that if you are to empty the horn with the
third draught, then this will be the greatest. You
will not be deemed so great a man here among
us as the asas call you, if you do not distinguish

yourself more in other feats than you seem to me
to have done in this. Then Thor became wroth,
set the horn to his mouth and drank with all
his might and kept on as long as he could, and

when he looked into it its contents had indeed

visibly diminished, but he gave back the horn

and would not drink any more. Said Utgard-
Loke : It is clear that your might is not so great
as we thought. Would you like to try other

games? It is evident that you gained nothing

by the first. Answered Thor : I should like
to try other games, but I should be surprised if

such a drink at home among the asas would be
called small. What game will you now offer me?
Answered Utgard-Loke: Young lads here think
it nothing but play to lift my cat up from the
ground, and I should never have dared to offer

such a thing to Asa-Thor had I not already seen
that you are much less of a man than I thought.
Then there sprang forth on the floor a gray cat,
and it was rather large. . Thor went over to it,



124 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

put his hand under the middle of its body and

tried to lift it up, but the cat bent its back in

the same degree as Thor raised his hands; and

when he had stretched them up as far as he was
able the cat lifted one foot, and Thor did not

carry the game any further. Then said Utgard-
Loke : This game ended as I expected. The cat

is rather large, and Thor is small, and little com-

pared with the great men that are here with us.
Said Thor: Little as you call me, let anyone who
likes come hither and wrestle with me, for now I
am wroth. Answered Utgard-Loke, looking about
him on the benches: I do not see anyone here

who would not think it a trifle to wrestle with

you. And again he said : Let me see first ! Call
hither that old woman, Elle, my foster-mother,
and let Thor wrestle with her if he wants to.

She has thrown to the ground men who have
seemed to me no less strong than Thor. Then
there came into the hall an old woman. Utgard-
Loke bade her take a wrestle w^ith Asa-Thor.

The tale is not long. The result of the grapple
was, that the more Thor tightened his grasp, the

firmer she stood. Then the woman began to
bestir herself, and Thor lost his footing. They
had some very hard tussles, and before long Thor

was brought down on one knee. Then Utgard-
Loke stepped forward, bade them cease the wrest-

ling, and added that Thor did not need to chal-



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 125

lenge anybody else to wrestle with him in his

hall, besides it was now getting late. He showed
Thor and his companions to seats, and they spent
the night there enjoying the best of hospitality.

48. At daybreak the next day Thor and his

companions arose, dressed themselves and were

ready to depart. Then came Utgard-Loke and

had the table spread for them, and there was

no lack of feasting both in food and in drink.

When they had breakfasted, they immediately
departed from the burg. Utgard-Loke went with

them out of the burg, but at parting he spoke
to Thor and asked him how he thought his

journey had turned out, or whether he had ever

met a mightier man than himself Thor an-
swered that he could not deny that he had been

greatly disgraced in this meeting ; and this I

know, he added, that you will call me a man
of little account, whereat I am much mortified.
Then said Utgard-Loke : Now I will tell you the
truth, since you have come out of the burg, that

if I live, and may have my way, you shall never
enter it again; and this I know, forsooth, that

you should never have come into it had I before

known that you were so strong, and that you
had come so near bringing us into great mis-

fortune. Know, then, that I have deceived you
with illusions. When I first found you in the
woods I came to meet you, and when you were



126 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

to loose the provision-sack I liad bound it with

iron threads, but you did not find where it was

to be untied. In the next place, you struck me
three times with the hammer. The first blow
w^as the least, and still it was so severe that it

would have been my death if it had hit me. You
saw near my burg a mountain cloven at the top
into three square dales, of which one was the

deepest,
— these were the dints made by your ham-

mer. The mountain I brought before the blows
without your seeing it. In like manner I deceived

you in your contests with my courtiers. In regard
to the first, in which Loke took part, the facts

w^ere as follows: He was very hungry and ate

fast; but he whose name w^as Loge was wdld-

fire, and he burned the trough no less rapidly
than the meat. When Thjalfe ran a race with
him whose name w^as Huge, that was my thought,
and it was impossible for him to keep pace with

its swiftness. When you drank from the horn, and

thought that it diminished so little, then, by my
troth, it was a great wonder, which I never could

have deemed possible. One end of the horn

stood in the sea, but that you did not see. When

you come to the sea-shore you w^ill discover how
much the sea has sunk by your drinking; that
is now called the ebb. Furthermore he said :
Nor did it seem less wonderful to me that you
lifted up the cat ; and, to tell you the truth, all



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 127

who saw it were frightened when they saw that

you raised one of its feet from the ground, for

it was not such a cat as you thought. It was

in reality the Midgard-serpent, which surrounds

all lands. It was scarcely long enough to touch

the earth with its tail and head, and you raised

it so high that your hand nearly reached to

heaven. It was also a most astonishing feat

when you wrestled with Elle, for none has ever

been, and none shall ever be, that Elle (eld, old

age) will not get the better of him, though he gets
to be old enough to abide her coming. And now
the truth is that we must part; and it will be
better for us both that you do not visit me

again. I will again defend my burg with similar
or other delusions, so that you will get no power
over me. When Thor heard this tale he seized
his hammer and lifted it into the air, but when
he was about to strike he saw Utgard-Loke
nowhere

;
and when he turned back to the burg

and was going to dash that to pieces, he saw a

beautiful and large plain, but no burg. So he

turned and went his way back to Thrudvang.
But it is truthfully asserted that he then resolved
in his own mind to seek that meeting with the

Midgard-serpent, which afterward took place.
And now I think that no one can tell you truer

tidings of this journey of Thor.

49. Then said Ganglere: A most powerful



128 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

man is Utgard-Loke, tliough he deals mucli with
delusions and sorcery. His power is also proven

by the fact that he had thanes who were so

mighty. But has not Thor avenged himself for

this? Made answer Har: It is not unknown,
though no wise men tell thereof, how Thor made
amends for the journey that has now been spoken
of. He did not remain long at home, before he
busked himself so suddenly for a new journey,
that he took neither chariot, nor goats nor any

companions with him. He went out of Midgard
in the guise of a young man, and came in the

evening to a giant by name Hymer.* Thor

tarried there as a guest through the night. In

the morning Hymer arose, dressed himself, and
busked himself to row out upon the sea to fish.

Thor also sprang up, got ready in a hurry and

asked Hymer whether he might row out with
him. Hymer answered that he would get but
little help from Thor, as he was so small and

young ; and he added, you will get cold if I row

as far out and remain as long as I am wont.
Thor said that he might row as far from shore

as he pleased, for all that, and it was yet to be

seen who would be the first to ask to row back
to land. And Thor grew so wroth at the giant
that he came near letting the hammer ring on

* Called Ymer in the Younger Edda, but the Elder Edda calls
him Hymer.



THE FOOLING OP GTLFE. 129

his head straightway, but he restrained himself,
for he intended to try his strength elsewhere.

He asked Hymer what they were to have for

bait, but Hymer replied that he would have to
find his own bait. Then Thor turned away to
where he saw a herd of oxen, that belonged to

Hymer. He took the largest ox, which w^as
called Himinbrjot, twisted his head off and

brought it down to the sea-strand. Hymer had
then shoved the boat off. Thor went on board

and seated himself in the stern; he took two

oars and rowed so that Hymer had to confess
that the boat sped fast from his rowing. Hymer
plied the oars in the bow, and thus the rowing
soon ended. Then said Hymer that they had
come to the place where he was wont to sit and

catch flat-fish, but Thor said he would like to

row much farther out, and so they made another
swift pull. Then said Hymer that they had
come so far out that it was dangerous to stay

there, for the Midgard-serpent. Thor said he

wished to row a while longer, and so he did;
but Hymer was by no means in a happy mood.
Thor took in the oars, got ready a very strong
line, and the hook was neither less nor weaker.

When he had put on the ox-head for bait, he
cast it overboard and it sank to the bottom. It

must be admitted that Thoi' now beguiled the

Midgard-serpent not a whit less than Utgard-



130 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Loke mocked him when he was to lift the ser-

pent with his hand. The Midgard-serpent took
the ox-head into his mouth, whereby the hook
entered his palate, but when the serpent per-
ceived this he tugged so hard that both Thor's

hands were dashed against the gunwale. Now
Thor became angry, assumed his asa-might and

spurned so hard that both his feet went through
the boat and he stood on the bottom of the sea.

He pulled the serpent up to the gunwale ; and in
truth no one has ever seen a more terrible sight
than when Thor whet his eyes on the serpent, and
the latter stared at him and spouted venom. It

is said that the giant Hymer changed hue and

grew pale from fear when he saw the serpent and

beheld the water flowing into the boat ; but just
at the moment when Thor grasped the hammer

and lifted it in the air, the giant fumbled for his

fishing-knife and cut off Thor's line at the gun-

wale, whereby the serpent sank back into the

sea. Thor threw the hammer after it, and it is even

said that he struck off* his head at the bottom,
but I think the truth is that the Midgard-serpent
still lives and lies in the ocean. Thor clenched

his fist and gave the giant a box on the ear so

that he fell backward into the sea, and he saw

his heels last, but Thor waded ashore.



CHAPTER XV.

THE DEATH OF BALDER.

50. Then asked Ganglere : Have there happened

any other remarkable things among the asas ? A
great deed it was, forsooth, that Thor wrought on

this journey. Har answered : Yes, indeed, there
are tidings to be told that seemed of far greater

importance to the asas. The beginning of this

tale is, that Balder dreamed dreams great and

dangerous to his life. When he told these dreams
to the asas they took counsel together, and it

was decided that they should seek peace for

Balder against all kinds of harm. So Frigg ex-

acted an oath from fire, water, iron and all kinds

of metal, stones, earth, trees, sicknesses, beasts,

birds and creeping things, that they should not

hurt Balder. When this was done and made

known, it became the pastime of Balder and the

asas that he should stand up at their meetings
while some of them should shoot at him, others

should hew at him, while others should throw
stones at him

;
but no matter what they did, no

harm came to him, and this seemed to all a great
honor. When Loke, Laufey's son, saw this, it

131



132 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

displeased him very much that Balder was not
scathed. So he went to Frigg, in Fensal, having
taken on himself the likeness of a woman. Frigg
asked this woman whether she knew what the
asas were doing at their meeting. She answered

that all were shooting at Balder, but that he was

not scathed thereby. Then said Frigg: Neither

weapon nor tree can hurt Balder, I have taken

an oath from them all. Then asked the woman :
Have all things taken an oath to spare Balder?

Frigg answered : West of Valhal there grows a
little shrub that is called the mistletoe, that

seemed to me too young to exact an oath from.
Then the woman suddenly disappeared. Loke
went and pulled up the mistletoe and proceeded
to the meeting. Hoder stood far to one side in

the ring of men, because he was blind. Loke

addressed himself to him, and asked : Why do
you not shoot at Balder ? He answered : Because
I do not see where he is, and furthermore I have

no weapons. Then said Loke : Do like the others
and show honor to Balder; I will show you where

he stands
;
shoot at him with this wand. Hoder

took the mistletoe and shot at Balder under the

guidance of Loke. The dart pierced him and he

fell dead to the ground. This is the greatest
misfortune that has ever happened to gods and

men. When Balder had fallen, the asas were
struck speechless with horror, and their hands



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 183

failed them to lay hold of the corpse. One looked
at the other, and all were of one mind toward

him who had done the deed, but being assembled
in a holy peace-stead, no one could take vengeance.
When the asas at length tried to speak, the wail-

ing so choked their voices that one could not

describe to the other his sorrow. Odin took this

misfortune most to heart, since he best compre-
hended how great a loss and injury the fall of
Balder was to the asas. When the gods came to
their senses, Frigg spoke and asked who there

might be among the asas who desired to win all
her love and good will by riding the way to Hel
and trying to find Balder, and offering Hel a ran-

som if she would allow Balder to return home

again to Asgard. But he is called Hermod, the

Nimble, Odin's swain, who undertook this jour-
ney. Odin's steed, Sleipner, was led forth. Her-

mod mounted him and galloped away.
51. The asas took the corpse of Balder and

brought it to the sea-shore. Hringhorn was the

name of Balder's ship, and it was the largest of
all ships. The gods wanted to launch it and
make Balder's bale-fire thereon, but they could
not move it. Then they sent to Jotunheim after
the giantess whose name is Hyrrokken. She
came riding on a wolf, and had twisted serpents
for reins. When she alighted, Odin appointed
four berserks to take care of her steed, but they



134 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

were unable to hold him except by throwing
him down on the ground. Hyrrokken went
to the prow and launched the ship with one

single push, but the motion was so violent that

fire sprang from the underlaid rollers and all

the earth shook. Then Thor became wroth,

grasped his hammer, and would forthwith have

crushed her skull, had not all the gods asked

peace for her. Balder's corpse was borne out on

the ship ; and when his wife, Nanna, daughter of

Nep, saw this, her heart was broken with grief
and she died. She was borne to the funeral-pile
and cast on the fire. Thor stood by and hal-

lowed the pile with Mjolner. Before his feet ran

a dwarf, whose name is Lit. Him Thor kicked
with his foot and dashed him into the fire, and

he, too, was burned. But this faneral-pile was

attended by many kinds of folk. First of all
came Odin, accompanied by Frigg and the valky-
ries and his ravens. Frey came riding in his

chariot drawn by the boar called Gullinburste or

Slidrugtanne. Heimdal rode his steed Gulltop,
and Freyja drove her cats. There was a large
number of frost-giants and mountain-giants. Odin

laid on the funeral-pile his gold ring, Draupner,
which had the property of producing, every ninth

night, eight gold rings of equal weight. Balder's

horse, fully caparisoned, was led to his master's

pile.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 135

52. But of Hermod it is to be told that he
rode nine nights through deep and dark valleys,
and did not see light until he came to the Gjallar-
river and rode on the Gjallai^-bridge, which is

thatched with shining gold. Modgud is the
name of the may who guards the bridge. She
asked him for his name, and of what kin he was,

saying that the day before there rode five fylkes

(kingdoms, bands) of dead men over the bridge ;
but she added, it does not shake less under you

alone, and you do not have the hue of dead men.

Why do you ride the way to Hel? He an-
swered: I am to ride to Hel to find Balder.
Have you seen him pass this way ? She answered
that Balder had ridden over the Gjallar-bridge ;

adding: But downward and northward lies the

way to Hel. Then Hermod rode on till he came
to Hel's gate. He alighted from his horse, drew
the girths tighter, remounted him, clapped the

spurs into him, and the horse leaped over the

gate with so much force that he never touched
it. Thereupon Hermod proceeded to the hall
and alighted from his steed. He went in, and
saw there sitting on the foremost seat his brother
Balder. He tarried there over night. In the

morning he asked Hel whether Balder might
ride home with him, and told how great weeping
there was among the asas. But Hel replied that
it should now be tried whether Balder was so



136 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

much beloved as was said. If all things, said

she, both quick and dead, will weep for him, then
he shall go back to the asas, but if anything re-

fuses to shed tears, then he shall remain with

Hel. Hermod arose, and Balder accompanied
him out of the hall. He took the ring Draupner
and sent it as a keepsake to Odin. Nanna sent

Frigg a kerchief and other gifts, and to Fulla she

sent a ring. Thereupon Hermod rode back and
came to Asgard, where he reported the tidings
he had seen and heard.

53. Then the asas sent messengers over all the

world, praying that Balder might be wept out of

Hel's power. All things did so,
—men and beasts,

the earth, stones, trees and all metals, just as you
must have seen that these things weep when they
come out of frost and into heat. When the mes-

sengers returned home and had done their errand

well, they found a certain cave wherein sat a

giantess (gygr=ogress) whose name was Thok.

They requested her to weep Balder from Hel;
but she answered :

Thok will weep
With dry tears
For Balder 's burial;
Neither in life nor in death

Gave he me gladness.
Let Hel keep what she has!



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 137

It is generally believed tliat this Thok was

Loke, Laufey^s son, wlio has wrought most evil

among the asas.
54. Then said Ganglere : A very great wrong

did Loke perpetrate ; first of all in causing Bal-

der's death, and next in standing in the way of
his being loosed from Hel. Did he get no pun-
ishment for this misdeed ? Har answered : Yes,
he was repaid for this in a way that he will long
remember. The gods became exceedingly wroth,
as might be expected. So he ran away and hid
himself in a rock. Here he built a house with

four doors, so that he might keep an outlook on

all sides. Oftentimes in the daytime he took

on him the likeness of a salmon and con-

cealed himself in Frananger Force. Then he

thought to himself what sti'atagems the asas

might have recourse to in order to catch him.

Now, as he was sitting in his house, he took flax
and yarn and worked them into meshes, in the

manner that nets have since been made; but a

fire was burning before him. Then he saw that
the asas were not far distant. Odin had seen

from Hlidskjalf where Loke kept himself Loke

immediately sprang up, cast the net on the fire

and leaped into the river. When the asas came
to the house, he entered first who was wisest of
them all, and whose name was Kvaser ; and when
he saw in the fire the ashes of the net that had



138 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

been "burned, he understood that this must be a

contrivance for catchins; fish, and this he told to

the asas. Thereupon they took flax and made
themselves a net after the pattern of that which

they saw in the ashes and which Loke had made.

When the net was made, the asas went to the
river and cast it into the force. Thor held one
end of the net, and all the other asas laid hold on

the other, thus jointly drawing it along the stream.

Loke went before it and laid himself down be-
tween two stones, so that they drew the net over

him, although they perceived that some living

thing touched the meshes. They went up to the
force again and cast out the net a second time.

This time they hung a great weight to it, making
it so heavy that nothing could possibly pass
under it. Loke swam before the net, but when
he saw that he was near the sea he sprang over

the top of the net and hastened back to the force.

When the asas saw whither he went they pro-
ceeded up to the force, dividing themselves into

two bands, but Thor waded in the middle of the

stream, and so they dragged the net along to the

sea. Loke saw that he now had only two chances
of escape,

— either to risk his life and swim out
to sea, or to leap again over the net. He chose
the latter, and made a tremendous leap over the

top line of the net. Thor grasped after him and

caught him, but he slipped in his hand so that



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 139

Thor did not get a firm hold before he got to the

tail, and this is the reason why the salmon has so
slim a tail. No\y Loke was taken without truce

and was brought to a cave. The gods took three
rocks and set them up on edge, and bored a hole

through each rock. Then they took Loke's sons,
Vale and Nare or Narfe. Vale they changed into

the likeness of a wolf, whereupon he tore his

brother Narfe to pieces, with whose intestines

the asas bound Loke over the three rocks. One
stood under his shoulders, another under his loins,
and the third under his hams, and the fetters be-

came iron. Skade took a serpent and fastened

up over him, so that the venom should drop from
the serpent into his face. But Sigyn, his wife,
stands by him, and holds a dish under the venom-

drops. Whenever the dish becomes full, she goes
and pours away the venom, and meanwhile the
venom drops onto Loke's face. Then he twists his

body so violently that the whole earth shakes,
and this you call earthquakes. There he will lie

bound until Eagnarok.



CHAPTER XVL

RAGNAROK.

55. Then said Ganglere: What tidings are to
be told of Rao^narok ? Of this I have never
heard before. Har answered: Great things are
to be said thereof First, there is a winter called

the Fimbul-winter, when snow drives from all

quarters, the frosts are so severe, the winds so

keen and piercing, that there is no joy in the sun.

There are three such winters in succession, with-

out any intervening sunnner. But before these

there are three other winters, during which great
ware rage over all the world. Brothers slay each

other for the sake of gain, and no one spares his

father or mother in that manslaughter and adul-

tery. Thus says the Vala's Prophecy:
Brothers will fight together

And become each other's bane;
Sisters' children

Their sib shall spoil.*
Hard is the world,
Sensual sins grow huge.
There are ax-ages, sword-ages

—
Shields are cleft in twain,

—
There are wind-ages, wolf-ages,
Ere the world falls dead.f

* Commit adultery.
t Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 48, 49



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 141

Then happens what will seem a great miracle,
that the wolf* devours the sun, and this will seem

a great loss. The other wolf will devour the

moon, and this too will cause great mischief

The stars shall be hurled from heaven. Then
it shall come to pass that the earth and the

mountains will shake so violently that trees will

be torn up by the roots, the mountains will

topple down, and all bonds and fetters will be

broken and snapped. The Fenris-wolf gets loose.
The sea rushes over the earth, for the Midgard-
serpent writhes in giant rage and seeks to gain
the land. The ship that is called Naglfar also
becomes loose. It is made of the nails of dead
men

;
wherefore it is worth warning that, when

a man dies with unpared nails, he supplies a

large amount of materials for the building of

this ship, which both gods and men wish may
be finished as late as possible. But in this flood

Naglfar gets afloat. The giant Hrym is its steers-
man. The Fenris-wolf advances with wide open
mouth

;
the upper jaw reaches to heaven and the

lower jaw is on the earth. He would open it
still wider had he room. Fire flashes from his

eyes and nostrils. The Midgard-serpent vomits

forth venom, defiling all the air and the sea;
he is very terrible, and places himself by the side

of the wolf. In the midst of this clash and din

* Fenris-wolf.



142 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

the heavens are rent in twain, and the sons of

Muspel come I'idiug through the opening. Surt

rides first, and before liim and after him flames

bni'ning fire. He has a very good sword, which
shines blighter than the sun. As they ride over
Bifrost it breaks to pieces, as has before been

stated. The sons of Muspel direct their course
to the phxin which is called Vigrid. Thither

repair also the Fenris-wolf and the Midgard-

serpent. To this place have also come Loke and

Hrym, and with him all the frost-giants. In

Loke's company ai'e all the friends of Hel. The

sons of Muspel have there efiiilgent bands alone

by themselves. The plain Vigrid is one hundred

miles (rasts) on each side

56. While these things are happening, Heim-

dal stands up, blows with all his might in the

Gjallar-horn and awakens all the gods, who there-

upon hold counsel. Odin rides to Mimer's well

to ask advice of Mimer for himself and his folk.
Then quivers the ash Ygdrasil, and all things
in heaven and earth fear and tremble. The asas

and the einherjes arm themselves and speed forth

to the battle-field. Odin rides first; with his

golden helmet, resplendent byrnie, and his spear

Gungner, he advances against the Fenris-wolf.

Thoi' stands by his side, but can give him no

assistance, for he has his hands full in his strug-

gle with the Midgard-serpent. Frey encounters



THE FOOLING OF OYLFE. 143

Surt, and heavy blows are exchanged ere Frey
falls. The cause of his death is that he has not
that good sword which he gave to Skirner. Even
the dog Garm, that was bound before the Gnipa-
cave, gets loose. He is the greatest plague. He
contends with Tyr, and they kill each other.

Thor gets great renown by slaying the Midgard-
serpent, but retreats only nine paces when he
falls to the earth dead, poisoned by the venom
that the serpent blows on him. The wolf swallows

Odin, and thus causes his death ; but Vidar im-

mediately turns and rushes at the wolf, placing
one foot on his nether jaw. On this foot he has
the shoe for which materials have been gathering

through all ages, namely, the strips of leather

which men cut off for the toes and heels of
shoes

;
wherefore he who wishes to render assist-

ance to the asas must cast these strips away.
With one hand Vidar seizes the upper jaw of the

wolf, and thus rends asunder his mouth. Thus

the wolf perishes. Loke fights with Heimdal,
and they kill each other. Thereupon Surt flings
fii*e over the earth and burns up all the world.
Thus it is said in the Vala's Prophecy :

Loud blows Heimdal
His uplifted horn.

Odin speaks
With Mimer's head.
The straight-standing ash

Ygdrasil quivers,



144 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

The old tree groans,
And the giant gets loose.

How fare the asas?
How fare the elves?
All Jotunheim roars.

The asas hold counsel;
Before their stone-doors

Groan the dwarfs,
The guides of the wedge-rock.
Know you now more or not?

From the east drives Hrym,
Bears his shield before him.

Jormungand welters

In giant rage
And smites the waves.
The eagle screams,
And with pale beak tears corpses.
Naglfar gets loose.

A ship comes from the east,
The hosts of Muspel
Come o'er the main,
And Loke is steersman.
All the fell powers
Are with the wolf;

Along with them

Is Byleist's brother.*

From the south comes Surt
With blazing fire-brand,—
The sun of the war-god
Shines from his sword.

Mountains dash together.
Giant maids are frightened.
Heroes go the way to Hel,
And heaven is rent in twain.

*Loke.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 145

Then comes to Hlin
Another woe,
When Odin goes
With the wolf to fight,
And Bele's bright slayer*
To contend with Surt.
There will fall

Frigg's beloved.

Odin's son goes
To fight with the wolf.
And Vidar goes on his way
To the wild beast.f
With his hand he thrusts
His sword to the heart

Of the giant's child,
And avenges his father.

Then goes the famous

Sont of Hlodyn
To fight with the serpent.
Though about to die,
He fears not the contest;
All men
Abandon their homesteads
When the warder of Midgard
In wrath slays the serpent.

The sun grows dark,
The earth sinks into the sea,
The bright stars
From heaven vanish;
Fire rages,

Heat blazes.
And high flames play
'Gainst heaven itself. §

Frey. fThe Fenris-wolf. JThor.
§ Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 50-53, 54-57, 59, 60, 62, 63.



146 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

And asrain it is said as follows :

Vigrid is the name of the plain
Where in fight shall meet
Surt and the gentle god.
A hundred miles
It is every way.
This field is marked out for them.

Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 18.



CHAPTER XVII.

REGEypRATION.

57. Then asked Ganglere : What happens when
heaven and earth and all the world are consumed

in flames, and when all the gods and all the

einherjes and all men are dead ? You have

already said that all men shall live in some

world through all ages. Har answered: There
are many good and many bad abodes. Best it
is to be in Gimle, in heaven. Plenty is there of

good drink for those who deem this a joy in the
hall called Brimer. That is also in heaven.

There is also an excellent hall which stands on

the Nida mountains. It is built of red gold, and

is called Sindre. In this hall good and well-

minded men shall dwell. Nastrand is a large
and terrible hall, and its doors open to the north.

It is built of serpents wattled together, and all

the heads of the serpents turn into the hall and

vomit forth venom that flows in streams along
the hall, and in these streams wade perjurers and

murderers. So it is here said :

A hall I know standing
Far from the sun

On the strand of dead bodies.
147



148 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Drops of venom
Fall through the loop-holes.
Of serpents' backs
The hall is made.

There shall wade

Through heavy streams

Perjurers

And murderers.

But in Hvergelmer it is worst.

There tortures Nidhug
The bodies of the dead.*

58. Then said Ganglere: Do any gods live
then? Is there any earth or heaven? Har an-
swered : The earth rises again from the sea, and
is green and fair. The fields unsown produce
their harvests. Vidar and Vale live. Neither

the sea nor Surt's fire has harmed them, and they
dwell on the plains of Ida, where Asgard was

before. Thither come also the sons of Thor,
Mode and Magne, and they have Mjolner. Then
come Balder and Hoder from Hel. They all sit

together and talk about the things that happened

aforetime,
— about the Midgard-serpent and the

Fenris-wolf They find in the grass those golden
tables which the asas once had. Thus it is said :

Vidar and Vale

Dwell in the house of the gods,
When quenched is the fire of Surt.

* Elder Edda: The Vala's Prophecy, 40, 41.



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE. 149

Mode and Magne
Vingner's Mjolner shall have

When the fight is ended.*

In a place called Hodmimer's-holt f are con-

cealed two persons during Surfs fire, called Lif

and Lifthraser. They feed on the morning dew.

From these so numerous a race is descended that

they fill the whole world with people, as is here

said:
Lif and Lifthraser

Will lie hid

In Hodmimer's-holt.

The morning dew

They have for food.
From them are the races descended, t

But what will seem wonderful to you is that

the sun has brought forth a daughter not less

fair than herself, and she rides in the heavenly
course of her mother, as is here said :

A daughter
Is bom of the sun

« Ere Fenrer takes her.

In her mother's course

When the gods are dead
This maid shall ride. §

And if you now can ask more questions, said
Har to Ganglere, I know not whence that power
came to you. I have never heard any one tell

* Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 51.
t Holt = grove.
i Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 45.
§ Elder Edda: Vafthrudner's Lay, 47.



150 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

further the fate of the world. Make now the
best use you can of what has been told you.

59. Then Ganglere heard a terrible noise on
all sides, and when he looked about him he stood
out-doors on a level plain. He saw neither hall
nor burg. He went his way and came back to
his kingdom, and told the tidings which he had

seen and heard, and ever since those tidings have

been handed down from man to man.



AFTERWOKD

TO THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.

The asas now sat down to talk, and held their

counsel, and remembered all the tales that were

told to Gylfe. They gave the very same names

that had been named before to the men and

places that were there. This they did for the

reason that, when a long time has elapsed, men
should not doubt that those asas of whom these
tales were now told and those to whom the same
names were given were all identical. There was

one who is called Thor, and he is Asa-Thor, the
old. He is Oku-Thor, and to him are ascribed
the great deeds done by Hektor in Troy. But
men think that the Turks have told of Ulysses,
and have called him Loke, for the Turks were

his greatest enemies.

151





BRAGE'S TALK

CHAPTER L

^GER'S JOURNEY TO ASGARD.

1. A man by name Mgei% or Hler, who dwelt
on the island called Hler's Isle, was well skilled

in the black art. He made a journey to Asgard.
But the asas knew of his coming and gave him a

friendly reception ; but they also made use of

many sorts of delusions. In the evening, when
the feast began, Odin had swords brought into

the hall, and they were so bright that it glistened
from them so that there was no need of any other

light while they sat drinking. Then went the
asas to their feast, and the twelve asas who were

appointed judges seated themselves in their high-
seats. These are their names : Thor, Njord, Frey,

Tyr, Heimdal, Brage, Vidar, Vale, Uller, Honer,

Forsete, Loke. The asynjes (goddesses) also were
with them: Frigg, Freyja, Gefjun, Idun, Gerd,

Sigyn, Fulla, Nanna. ^ger thought all that he
saw looked very grand. The panels of the walls

153



154 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

were all covered with beautiful shields. The

mead was very strong, and they drank deep.
Next to ^ger sat Brage, and they talked much

together over their drink. Brage spoke to ^ger
of many things that had happened to the asas.



CHAPTER n.

IDUN AND HER APPLES.

2. Brage began his tale by telling how three

asas, Odin, Loke and Honer, went on a journey
over mountains and heaths, where they could get

nothing to eat. But when they came down into
a valley they saw a herd of cattle. From this
herd they took an ox and went to w^ork to boil

it. When they deemed that it must be boiled

enough they uncovered the broth, but it was not

yet done. After a little while they lifted the cover

off again, but it was not yet boiled. They talked

among themselves about how this could happen.
Then they heard a voice in the oak above them,
and he wIlo sat there said that he was the cause

that the broth did not get boiled. They looked

up and saw an eagle, and it was not a small one.

Then said the eagle : If you will give me my fill
of the ox, then the broth will be boiled. They
agreed to this. So he flew down from the tree,
seated himself beside the boiling broth, and im-

mediately snatched up first the two thighs of the

ox and then both the shoulders. This made Loke

wroth : he grasped a large pole, raised it with all
155



156 THE YOUNGER EDDA

his might and dashed it at the body of the eagle.
The eagle shook himself after the blow and flew

up. One end of the pole fastened itself to the

body of the eagle, and the other end stuck to
Loke's hands. The eagle flew just high enough
so that Loke's feet were dragged over stones and

rocks and trees, and it seemed to him that his
arms would be torn from his shoulder-blades.
He calls and prays the eagle most earnestly for

peace, but the latter declares that Loke shall

never get free unless he will pledge himself to

bring Idun and her apples out of Asgard. When
Loke had promised this, he was set free and
went to his companions again; and no more is

related of this journey, except that they returned

home. But at the time agreed upon, Loke coaxed
Idun out of Asgard into a forest, saying that he
had found apples that she would think very nice,
and he requested her to take with her her own

apples in order to compare them. Then came
the giant Thjasse in the guise of an eagle, seized

Idun and flew away with her to his home in

Thrymheim. The asas were ill at ease on account
of the disappearance of Idun,

—
they became gray-

haired and old. They met in council and asked
each other who last had seen Idun. The last
that had been seen of her was that she had gone
out of Asgard in company with Loke. Then
Loke was seized and brought into the council,



brage's talk. 157

and he was threatened with death or torture.
But he became frightened, and promised to bring
Idun back from Jotunheim if Freyja would lend
him the falcon-guise that she had. He got the

falcon-guise, flew north into Jotunheim, and came

one day to the giant Thjasse. The giant had
rowed out to sea, and Idun was at home alone.
Loke turned her into the likeness of a nut, held
her in his claws and flew with all his might.
But when Thjasse returned home and missed

Idun, he took on his eagle-guise, flew after Loke,

gaining on the latter with his eagle wings. When
the asas saw the falcon coming flying with the

nut, and how the eagle flew, they went to the
walls of Asgard and brought with them bundles

of plane-shavings. When the falcon flew within
the burg, he let himself drop down beside the

burg-wall. Then the asas kindled a fire in the

shavings; and the eagle, being unable to stop
himself when he missed the falcon, caught fire
in his feathers, so that he could not fly any
farther. The asas were on hand and slew the

giant Thjasse within the gates of Asgard, and

that slaughter is most famous.



CHAPTER III.

HOW NJORD GOT SKADE TO WIFE.

Skade, the daughter of the giant Thjasse,
donned her helmet, and byrnie, and all her war-

gear, and betook herself to Asgard to avenge
her father's death. The asas offered her ransom
and atonement

;
and it was agreed to, in the first

place, that she should choose herself a husband

among the asas, but she was to make her choice

by the feet, which was all she was to see of their

persons. She saw one man's feet that were

wonderfully beautiful, and exclaimed; This one

I choose ! On Balder there are few blemishes.
But it was Njord, from Noatun. In the second

place, it was stipulated that the asas were to
do what she did not deem them capable of, and
that was to make her laugh. Then Loke tied
one end of a string fast to the beard of a goat
and the other around his own body, and one

pulled this way and the other that, and both
of them shrieked out loud. Then Loke let him-
self fall on Skade's knees, and this made her

laugh. It is said that Odin did even more than
was asked, in that he took Thjasse's eyes and

158



BRage's talk. 159

cast them up into heaven, and made two stars of
them. Then said JEger: This Thjasse seems to

me to have been considerable of a man
;
of what

kin was he ? Brage answered : His father's name
was Olvalde, and if I told you of him, you would

deem it very remarkable. He was very rich in

gold, and when he died and his sons were to
divide their heritage, they had this way of meas-

uring the gold, that each should take his mouth-

ful of gold, and they should all take the same

number of mouthfuls. One of them was Thjasse,
another Ide, and the third Gang. But we now
have it as a saw among us, that we call gold
the mouth-number of these giants. In runes and

songs we wrap the gold up by calling it the

measure, or word, or tale, of these giants. Then
said ^ger : It seems to me that it will be well
hidden in the runes.



CHAPTEE IV.

THE ORIGIN OF POETRY.

3. And again said JEiger: Whence originated
the art that is called skaldship? Made answer

Brage : The beginning of this was, that the gods
had a war with the people that are called vans.

They agreed to hold a meeting for the purpose
of making peace, and settled their dispute in this

wise, that they both went to a jar and spit into

it. But at parting the gods, being unwilling to

let this mark of peace perish, shaped it into a

man whose name was Kvaser, and who was so
wise that no one could ask him any question that

he could not answer. He traveled much about
in the world to teach men wisdom. Once he
came to the home of the dwarfs Fjalar and Galar.

They called him aside, saying they wished to

speak with him alone, slew him and let his blood

run into two jars called Son and Bodn, and into

a kettle called Odrarer. They mixed honey with

the blood, and thus was produced such mead
that whoever drinks from it becomes a skald and

sage. Xhe dwarfs told the asas that Kvaser had
choked in his wisdom, because no one was so wise

that he could ask him enough about learning.
160

J



BRAGE S TALK. 161

4. Then the dwarfs invited to themselves the

giant whose name is Gilling, and his wife ; and

when he came they asked him to row out to sea
with them. When they had gotten a short dis-
tance from shore, the dwarfs rowed onto a blind

rock and capsized the boat. Gilling, who was
unable to swim, was drowned, but the dwarfs

righted the boat again and rowed ashore. When

they told of this mishap to his wife she took

it much to heart, and began to cry aloud. Then

Fjalar asked her whether it would not lighten
her sorrow if she could look out upon the sea

where her husband had perished, and she said

it would. He then said to his brother Galar that
he should go up over the doorway, and as she

passed out he should let a mill-stone drop onto

her head, for he said he was tired of her bawling,
Galar did so. When the giant Suttung, the son
of Gilling, found this out he came and seized the

dwarfs, took them out to sea and left them on
a rocky island, which was flooded at high tide.

They prayed Suttung to spare their lives, and
offered him in atonement for their father's blood

the precious mead, which he accepted. Suttung

brought the mead home with him, and hid it
in a place called Hnitbjorg. He set his daughter
Gunlad to guard it. For these reasons we call

songship Kvaser's blood; the drink of the dwarfs;
the dwarfs' fill

;
some kind of liquor of Odrarer,



162 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

or Bodn or Son
;
the ship of the dwarfs (because

this mead ransomed their lives from the rocky-
isle);

the mead of Suttung, or the liquor of

Hnitbjorg.
5. Then remarked ^ger : It seems dark to me

to call songship by these names ; but how came
the asas by Suttung's mead ? Answered Brage :
The saga about this is, that Odin set out from
home and came to a place where nine thralls
were mowing hay. He asked them whether they
w^ould like to have him whet their scythes. To
this they said yes. Then he took a whet-stone
from his belt and whetted the scythes. They

thought their scythes were much improved, and
asked whether the whet-stone was for sale. He
answered that he who would buy it must pay
a fair price for it. All said they were willing
to give the sum demanded, and each wanted
Odin to sell it to him. But he threw the whet-

stone up in the air, and when all wished to catch
it they scrambled about it in such a manner

that each brought his scythe onto the other's

neck. Odin sought lodgings for the night at

the house of the giant Bauge, who was a brother
of Suttung. Bauge complained of what had

happened to his household, saying that his nine

thralls had slain each other, and that he did not

know where he should get other workmen. Odin
called himself Bolverk. He offered to undertake



BKAGES TALK. 168

the work of the nine men for Baiige, but asked
in payment therefor a drink of Suttung's mead.

Bauge answered that he had no control over the

mead, saying that Suttung was bound to keep
that for himself alone. But he agreed to go
with Bolverk and try whether they could get
the mead. During the summer Bolverk did the
work of the nine men for Bauge, but when winter
came he asked for his pay. Then they both went

to Suttung. Bauge exjDlained to Suttung his bar-

gain with Bolverk, but Suttung stoutly refused

to give even a drop of the mead. Bolverk then

proposed to Bauge that they should try whether

they could not get at the mead by the aid of
some trick, and Bauge agreed to this. Then

Bolverk drew forth the auger which is called

Rate, and requested Bauge to bore a hole through
the rock, if the auger was sharp enough. He did
so. Then said Bauge that there was a hole

through the rock; but Bolverk blowed into the

hole that the auger had made, and the chips
flew back into his face. Thus he saw that Bauge
intended to deceive him, and commanded him
to bore through. Bauge bored again, and when
Bolverk blew a second time the chips flew inward.

Now Bolverk changed himself into the likeness
of a serpent and crept into the auger-hole. Bauge
thrust after him with the auger, but missed him.
Bolverk went to where Gunlad was, and shared



164 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

her couch for three nights. She then promised
to give him three draughts from the mead. With
the first draught he emptied Odrarer, in the

second Bodn, and in the third Son, and thus he

had all the mead. Then he took on the guise of

an eagle, and flew off as fast as he could. When

Suttung saw the flight of the eagle, he also took

on the shape of an eagle and flew after him.

When the asas saw Odin coming, they set their

jars out in the yard. When Odin reached As-

gard, he spewed the mead up into the jars. He

was, however, so near being caught by Suttung,
that he sent some of the mead after him back-

ward, and as no care was taken of this, anybody
that wished might have it. This we call the
share of poetasters. But Suttung's mead Odin

gave to the asas and to those men who are able
to make verses. Hence we call songship Odin's

prey, Odin's find, Odin's drink, Odin's gift, and

the drink of the asas.

6. Then said ^ger: In how many ways do you
vary the poetical expressions, or how many kinds
of poetry are there? Answered Brage: There

are two kinds, and all poetry falls into one or the

other of these classes, ^ger asks : Which two ?

Brage answers : Diction and meter. What diction
is used in poetry ? There are three sorts of poetic
diction. Which ? One is to name everything by
its own name

;
another is to name it with a pro-



BKAGE S TALK. 165

noun, but the third sort of diction is called Icen-

ning (a poetical periphrasis or descriptive name) ;
and this sort is so managed that when we name

Odin, or Thor or Tyr, or any other of the asas or

elves, we add to their name a reference to some
other asa, or we make mention of some of his
works. Then the appellation belongs to him who

corresponds to the whole phrase, and not to him

who was actually named. Thus we speak of Odin
as Sigtyr, Hangatyr or Farmatyr, and such names

we call simple appellatives. In the same manner
he is called Reidartyr.



AFTERWORD

TO BRAGE'S TALK.

Now it is to be said to young skalds who are
desirous of acquiring the diction of poetry, or of

increasing their store of words with old names,

or, on the other hand, are eager to understand

what is obscurely sung, that they must master

this book for their instruction and pastime. These

sagas are not to be so forgotten or disproved as

to take away from poetry old periphrases which

great skalds have been pleased with. But chris-

tian men should not believe in heathen gods, nor

in the truth of these sagas, otherwise than is ex-

plained in the beginning of this book, where the

events are explained which led men away from

the true faith, and where it, in the next place, is

told of the Turks how the men from Asia, who
are called asas, falsified the tales of the things that

happened in Troy, in order that the people should

believe them to be gods.

King Priam in Troy was a great chief over all

the Turkish host, and his sons were the most dis-

tinguished men in his whole army. That excel-

lent hall, which the asas called Brime's Hall, or
166



AFTERWORD TO BRAGe's TALK. 167

beer-hall, was King Priam's palace. As for the

long tale that they tell of Ragnarok, that is the

wars of the Trojans. When it is said that Oku-
Thor angled wdth an ox-head and drew on board

the Midgard-serpent, but that the serpent kept
his life and sank back into the sea, then this is

another version of the story that Hektor slew

Volukrontes, a famous hero, in the presence of

Achilleus, and so drew the latter onto him with

the head of the slain, which they likened unto

the head of an ox, w^hich Oku-Thor had torn off.

When Achilleus was drawn into this danger, on
account of his daring, it was the salvation of his

life that he fled from the fatal blows of Hektor,

although he was wounded. It is also said that

Hektor waged the war so mightily, and that his

rage was so great when he caught sight of Achil-

leus, that nothing was so strong that it could

stand before him. When he missed Achilleus,
who had fled, he soothed his wrath by slaying
the champion called Roddros. But the asas say
that when Oku-Thor missed the serpent, he slew
the giant Hymer. In Ragnarok the Midgard-ser-

pent came suddenly upon Thor and blew venom
onto him, and thus struck him dead. But the

asas could not make up their minds to say that
this had been the fate of Oku-Thor, that anyone
stood over him dead, though this had so hap-
pened. They rushed headlong over old sagas



168 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

more than was true when they said that the Mid-

gard-serpent there got his death ; and they added

this to the story, that Achilleus reaped the fame

of Hektor's death, though he lay dead on the

same battle-field on that account. This was the

work of Elenus and Alexander, and Elenus the

asas call Ale. They say that he avenged his

brother, and that he lived when all the gods were

dead, and after the iife was quenched that burned

up Asgard and all the possessions of the gods.

Pyrrhos they compared with the Fenris-wolf He
slew Odin, and Pyrrhos might be called a wolf

according to their belief, for he did not spare the

peace-steads, when he slew the king in the temple
before the altar of Thor. The burning of Troy

they call the flame of Surt. Mode and Magne,
the sons of Oku-Thor, came to crave the land of
Ale or Vidar. He is ^neas. He came away
from Troy, and wrought thereupon great works.

It is said that the sons of Hektor came to Frigia-
land and established themselves in that kingdom,
but banished Elenus.



EXTRACTS FROM

THE POETICAL DICTION.
(SKALDSKAPARMAL.)*

THOR AND HRUNGNER.

Brage told Mger that Thor had gone eastward
to crush trolls. Odin rode on his horse Sleipner
to Jotunheim, and came to the giant whose name
is Hrungner. Then asked Hrungner what man
that was w^ho with a golden helmet rode both

through the air and over the sea, and added that

he had a remarkably good horse. Odin said

that he would wager his head that so good a horse

could not be found in Jotunheim. Hrungner
admitted that it was indeed an excellent horse,
but he had one, called Goldfax, that could take

much longer paces ; and in his wrath he imme-

diately sprang upon his horse and galloped after

Odin, intending to pay him for his insolence.

Odin rode so fast that he was a good distance

ahead, but Hrungner had worked himself into

such a giant rage that, before he was aware of

it, he had come within the gates of Asgard.

*This part of the Younger Edda corresponds to the Latin Ars
Poetica, and contains the rules and laws of ancient poetry.



170 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

When he came to the hall door, the asas invited
him to drink with them. He entered the hall
and requested a drink. They then took the

bowls that Thor was accustomed to drink from,
and Hrungner emptied them all. When he be-
came drunk, he gave the freest vent to his loud

boastings. He said he was going to take Valhal
and move it to Jotunheim, demolish Asgard and

kill all the gods except Freyja and Sif, whom he
was going to take home with him. When Freyja
went forward to refill the bowls for him, he

boasted that he was going to drink up all the

ale of the asas. But when the asas grew weary
of his arrogance, they named Thor's name. At
once Thor was in the hall, swung his hammer
in the air, and, being exceedingly wroth, asked

who was to blame that dog-wise giants were per-
mitted to drink there, who had given Hrungner
permission to be in Valhal, and why Freyja
should pour ale for him as she did in the feasts

of the asas. Then answered Hrungner, looking
with anything but friendly eyes at Thor, and

said that Odin had invited liim to drink, and

that he was there under his protection. Thor

replied that he should come to rue that invitation

before he came out. Hrungner again answered

that it would be but little credit to Asa-Thor to

kill Mm, unarmed as he was. It would be a

greater proof of his valor if he dared fight a duel



THE POETICAL DICTION. 171

with him at the boundaries of his territory, at

Grjottungard. It was very foolish of me, he

said, that I left my shield and my flint-stone at
home

;
had I my weapons here, you and I would

try a holmgang (duel on a rocky island) ; but

as this is not the case, I declare you a coward

if you kill me unarmed. Thor was by no means
the man to refuse to fight a duel when he was

challenged, an honor which never had been shown

him before. Then Hrungner went his way, and

hastened with all his might back to Jotunheim.

His journey became famonis among the giants,
and the proposed meeting with Thor was much
talked of. They regarded it very important who
should gain the victory, and they feared the

woi'st from Thor if Hrungner should be defeated,
for he was the strongest among them. There-

upon the giants made at Grjottungard a man of

clay, who was nine rasts tall and three rasts
broad under the arms, but being unable to find

a heart large enough to be suitable for him, they
took the heart from a mare, but even this flut-

tered and trembled when Thor came. Hrungner
had, as is well known, a heart of stone, sharp and

three-sided; just as the rune has since been listed

that is called Hrunc^ner's heart. Even his head

was of stone. His shield was of stone, and was

broad and thick, and he was holding this shield

before him as he stood at Grjottungard waiting



172 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

for Thor. His weapon was a flint-stone, which

he swung over his shoulders, and altogether he

presented a most formidable aspect. On one
side of him stood the giant of clay, who was
named Mokkerkalfe. He was so exceedingly
terrified, that it is said that he wet himself when
he saw Thor. Thor proceeded to the duel, and

Thjalfe was with him. Thjalfe ran forward to

where Hrungner was standing, and said to him :

You stand illy guarded, giant; you hold the
shield before you, but Thor has seen you; he

goes down into the earth and will attack you
from below. Then Hrungner thrust the shield

under his feet and stood on it, but the flint-stone

he seized with both his hands. The next that
he saw were flashes of lightning, and he heard

loud crashings ; and then he saw Thor in his asa-

might advancing with impetuous speed, swinging
his hammer and hurling it from afar at Hrungnen
Hrungner seized the flint-stone with both his hands

and threw it against the hammer. They met in
the air, and the flint-stone broke. One part fell
to the earth, and from it have come the flint-

mountains; the other part hit Thor's head with

such force that he fell forward to the ground.
But the hammer Mjolner hit Hrungner right in
the head, and crushed his skull in small pieces.
He himself fell forward over Thor, so that his
foot lay upon Thor's neck. Meanwhile Thjalfe



THE POETICAL DICTION. 1 73

attacked Mokkerkalfe, who fell with but little
honor. Then Thjalfe went to Thor and was to

take Hrungner's foot off from him, but he had

not the strength to do it. When the asas learned
that Thor had fallen, they all came to take the

giant's foot off, but none of them was able to

move it. Then came Magne, the son of Thor

and Jarnsaxa. He was only three nights of age.
He threw Hrungner's foot off Thor, and said'
It was a great mishap, father, that I came so late.

I think I could have slain this giant with my
fist, had I met him. Then Thor arose, greeted
his son lovingly, saying that he would become

great and powerful; and, added he, I will give

you the horse Goldfax, that belonged to Hrung-
ner. Odin said that Thor did wrong in giving
so fine a horse to the son of a giantess, instead

of to his father. Thor went home to Thrudvang,
but the flint-stone still stuck fast in his head. Then

came the vala whose name is Groa, the wife of

Orvandel the Bold. She sang her magic songs
over Thor until the flint-stone became loose. But

when Thor perceived this, and was just expecting
that the flint-stone would disappear, he desired

to reward Groa for her healing, and make her

heart glad. So he related to her how he had
waded from the north over the Elivogs rivers,
and had borne in a basket on his back Orvandel

from Jotunheim
;
and in evidence of this he told



174 THE YOUNGEII EDDA.

her how that one toe of his had protruded from
the basket and had frozen, wherefore Thor had

broken it off and had cast it up into the sky,
and made of it the star which is called Orvan-

del's toe. Finally he added that it would not be

long before Orvandel would come home. But

Groa became so glad that she forgot her magic

songs, and so the flint-stone became no looser

than it was, and it sticks fast in Thor's head yet.
For this reason it is forbidden to throw a flint-

stone across the floor, for then the stone in Thor's

head is moved. Out of this saga Thjodolf of

Hvin has made a song :

We have ample evidence
Of the giant- terrifier's

*
journey

To Grjottungard, to the giant Hrungner,
In the midst of encircling flames.

The courage waxed high in Meile's brother;!
The moon-way trembled
When .lord's son X went
To the steel-gloved contest.

The heavens stood all in flames
For Uller's step-father, §
And the earth rocked.
Svolne's

||
widow H burst asunder

When the span of goats
Drew the sublime chariot
And its divine master
To the meeting with Hrungner.

* Thor's. t Thor. t Jord's (= earth's) son = Thor.
§Thor. II Odin's. If The earth.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 175

Balder's brother* did not tremble

Before the greedy fiend of men;
Mountains quaked and rocks broke;
The heavens were wrapped in flames.
Much did the giant
Get frightened, I learn,
When his bane man he saw
Ready to slay him.

Swiftly the gray shield flew

'Neath the heels of the giant.
So the gods willed it,
So willed it the valkyries.

Hrungner the giant,
Eager for slaughter,
Needed not long to wait for blows
From the valiant friend of the hammer.

The slayer t of Dele's evil race
Made fall the bear of the loud-roaring mountain; |
On his shield
Bite the dust

Must the giant
Before the sharp-edged hammer,
When the giant-crusher
Stood against the mighty Hrungner,

And the flint-stone
(So hard to break)
Of the friend of the troll-women
Into the skull did whiz

Of Jord's son, §
And this flinty piece
Fast did stick

In Eindride'sll blood;

Until Orvandel's wife,

Magic songs singing,

Thor. t Thor. t The giant Hrungner. § Thor. 1 Thor's.



176 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

From the head of Thor
Removed the giant's
Excellent flint-stone.

All do I know
About that shield -journey.
A shield adorned
With hues most splendid
I received from Thorleif.

THOR'S JOURNEY TO GEIRROD'S.

Then said JEgev : Much of a man, it seems to

me, was that Hrungner. Has Thor accomplished
any other great deeds in his intercourse with

trolls (giants)? Then answered Brage: It is

worth giving a full account of how Thor made a

journey to Geirrodsgard. He had with him
neither the hammer Mjolner, nor his belt of

strength, Megingjard, nor his steel gloves; and

that was Loke's fault,— he was with him. For
it had happened to Loke, when he once flew
out to amuse himself in Frigg's falcon-guise, that

he, out of curiosity, flew into Geirrodsgard, where

he saw a large hall. He sat down and looked
in through the window, but Geirrod discovered

him, and ordered the bird to be caught and

brought to him. The servant had hard work

to climb up the wall of the hall, so high was

it. It amused Loke that it gave the servant so

much trouble to get at him, and he thought it
would be time enough to fly away when he



THE POETICAL DICTION. 177

had gotten over the worst. When the latter
now caught at him, Loke spread his wings and

spurned with his feet, but these were fast, and

so Loke was caught and brought to the giant.
When the latter saw his eyes he suspected that
it was a man. He put questions to him and bade
him answer, but Loke refused to speak. Then

Geirrod locked him down in a chest, and starved
him for three months

;
and when Geirrod finally

took him up again, and asked him to speak,
Loke confessed who he was, and to save his life
he swore an oath to Geirrod that he would get
Thor to come to Geirrodsgard without his ham-

mer or his belt of strength.
On his way Thor visited the giantess whose

name is Grid. She was the mother of Vidar the
Silent. She told Thor the truth concerning
Geirrod, that he was a dog-^wise and dangerous

giant ; and she lent him her own belt of strength
and steel gloves, and her staff, which is called

Gridarvol. Then Went Thor to the river which
is called Vimei*, and which is the largest of all

rivers. He buckled on the belt of strength and
stemmed the wild torrent with Gridarvol, but

Loke held himself fast in Megin^ard. When
Thor had come into the middle of the stream,
the river waxed so greatly that the waves dashed
over his shoulders. Then quoth Thor :



178 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Wax not Viraer,
Since I intend to wade
To the gards of giants.
Know, if you wax,
Then waxes my asa-might
As high as the heavens.

Then Thor looked up and saw in a cleft Gjalp,
the daughter of Geirrod, standing on both sides

of the stream, and causing its growth. Then
took he up out of the river a huge stone and

threw at her, saying: At its source the stream
must be stemmed.* He was not wont to miss
his mark. At the same time he reached the
river bank and got hold of a shrub, and so he

got out of the river. Hence comes the adage
that a shrub saved Tlior.'^ When Thor came
to Geirrod, he and his companion were shown to

the guest-room, where lodgings were given them,
but there was but one seat, and on that Thor sat

down. Then he became aware that the seat was

raised under him toward the roof. He put the
Gridarvol against the rafters, and pressed him-

self down against the seat. Then was heard a

great crash, which was followed by a loud scream-

ing. Under the seat were Geirrod's daughters,

Gjalp and Greip, and he had broken the backs

of both of them. Then quoth Thor :

Once I employed

My asa-might
In the gards of the giants.

* Icelandic proverb. f Icelandic proverb.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 179

When Gjalp and Greip,
Geirrod's daughters,
Wanted to lift me to heaven.

Then Geirrod had Thor invited into the hall
to the games. Large fires burned along the

whole length of the hall. When Thor came
into the hall, and stood opposite Geirrod, the
latter seized with a pair of tongs a red-hot iron

wedge and threw it at Thor. But he caught
it with his steel gloves, and lifted it up in the
air. Geirrod sprang behind an iron post to

guard himself. But Thor threw the wedge with
so great force that it struck through the post,

through Geirrod, through the wall, and then
went out and into the ground. From this saga,
Eilif, son of Gudrun, made the following song,
called Thor's Drapa :

The Midgard-serpent's father exhorted

Thor, the victor of giants,
To set out from home.
A great liar was Loke.
Not quite confident.
The companion of the war-god
Declared green paths to lie

To the gard of Geirrod.

Thor did not long let Loke

Invite him to the arduous journey.
They were eager to crush
Thorn's descendants.

When he, who is wont to swing Megingjard, .
Once set out from Odin's home
To visit Ymer's children in Gandvik,



180 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

The giantess Gjalp,
Perjured Geirrod's daughter,
Sooner got ready magic to use

Than the god of war and Loke.
A song I recite.
Those gods noxious to the giants
Planted their feet

In Endil's land,

And the men wont to battle
Went forth.
The message of death
Came of the moon-devourer's women,
When the cunning and wrathful
Conqueror of Loke

Challenged to a contest

The giantess.

And the troll-woman's disgracer
Waded across the roaring stream,—
Rolling full of drenched snow over its banks.

He who puts giants to flight
Rapidly advanced

O'er the broad watery way.
Where the noisy stream's
Venom belched forth.

Thor and his companions
Put before him the staff;
Thereon he rested

Whilst over they waded:

Nor sleep did the stones,—
The sonorous staff striking the rapid wave
Made the river-bed ring,—
The mountain-torrent rang with stones.

The wearer of Megingjard
Saw the flood fall
On his hard-waxed shoulders:
He could do no better.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 181

The destroyer of troll-children
Let his neck-strength
Wax heaven high,
Till the mighty stream should diminish.

But the warriors,
The oath-bound protectors of Asgard,—
The experienced vikings,—
Waded fast and the stream sped on.
Thou god of the bow!
The billows
Blown by the mountain-storm

Powerfully rushed

Over Thor's shoulders.

Thjalfe and his companion,
With their heads above water,
Got over the river,—
To Thor's belt they clung.
Their strength was tested,—
Geirrod's daughters made hard the stream
For the iron rod.

Angry fared Thor with the Gridarvol.

Nor did courage fail
Those foes of the giant
In the seething vortex.

Those sworn companions
Regarded a brave heart
Better than gold.
Neither Thor's nor Thjalfe 's heart

From fear did tremble.

And the war companions—
Weapons despising—
'Mong the giants made havoc,
Until, woman!
The giant destroyers
The conflict of helmets
With the warlike race
Did commence.



182 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

The giants of Iva's* capes
Made a rush with Geirrod;
The foes of the cold Svithiod

Took to flight.
Geirrod 's giants

Had to succumb
When the hghtning wielder'sf kinsmen
Closely pursued them.

Wailing was 'mongst the cave-dwellers

When the giants,
With warlike spirit endowed,
Went forward.
There was war.

The slayer of troll-women,

By foes surrounded,
The giant's hard head hit.

With violent pressure
Were pressed the vast eyes
Of Gjalp and Greip

Against the high roof.

The fire-chariot's driver

The old backs broke

Of both these maids

For the cave-woman.

The man of the rocky way
But scanty knowledge got;
Nor able were the giants
To enjoy perfect gladness.
Thou man of the bow-string!
The dwarf's kinsman

An iron beam, in the forge heated,
Threw agamst Odin's dear son.

* A river in Jotunheim.
t Thor's kinsmen = the asas.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 183

But the battle-hastener,

Freyja's old friend,

With swift hands caught
In the air the beam
As it flew from the hands

Of the father of Greip,—
His breast with anger swollen

Against Thruda's* father.

Geirrod's hall trembled

When he struck,
With his broad head,
'Gainst the old column of the house-wall.

UUer's splendid flatterer

Swung the iron beam

Straight 'gainst the head

Of the knavish giant.

The crusher of the hall-wont troll-women
A splendid victory won
Over Glam's descendants;
With gory hammer fared Thor.
Gridarvol-staff,

Which made disaster

'Mong Geirrod's companion,
Was not used 'gainst that giant himself.

The much worshiped thunderer,
With all his might, slew
The dwellers in Alfheim
With that little willow-twig,
And no shield
Was able to resist
The strong age-diminisher
Of the mountain-king.

*Thruda was a daughter of Thor and Sif.



184 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

IDUN.

How shall Idun be named ? She is called the
wife of Brage, the keeper of the apples ; but the

apples are called the medicine to bar old age

(ellilyf, elixir vitse). She is also called the booty
of the giant Thjasse, according to what has before

been said concerning how he took her away from
the asas. From this saga Thjodolf, of Hvin,

composed the following song in his Haustlong :

How shall the tongue
Pay an ample reward
For the sonorous shield

Which I received from Thorleif,
Foremost 'mong soldiers?

On the splendidly made shield
I see the unsafe journey

Of three gods and Thjasse.

Idun's robber flew long ago
The asas to meet

In the giant's old eagle-guise.
The eagle perched
Where the asas bore
Their food to be cooked.

Ye women! The mountain-giant
Was not wont to be timid.

Suspected of malice

Was the giant toward the gods.
Who causes this?
Said the chief of the gods.
The wise-worded giant-eagle
From the old tree began to speak.
The friend of Honer

Was not friendly to him.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 185

The mountain-wolf from Honer
Asked for his fill

From the holy table:
It fell to Honer to blow the fire.

The giant, eager to kill,
Glided down
Where the unsuspecting gods,
Odin, Loke and Honer, were sitting.

The fair lord of the earth
Bade Farbaute's son

Quickly to share

The ox with the giant;
But the cunning foe of the asas

Thereupon laid

The four parts of the ox

Upon the broad table.

And the huge father of Mom*
Afterward greedily ate

The ox at the tree-root.
That was long ago,
Until the profound
Loke the hard rod laid

'Twixt the shoulders

Of the giant Thjasse.

Then clung with his hands
The husband of Sigyn
To Skade's foster-son.
In the presence of all the gods.
The pole stuck fast
To Jotunheim's strong fascinator.
But the hands of Honer's dear friend
Stuck to the other end.

Flew then with the wise god
The voracious bird of prey
Far away; so the wolf's father

To pieces must be torn.

* A troll-woman.



186 THE YOIJNGKK EDDA.

Odin's friend got exhausted.

Heavy grew Lopt.
Odin's companion
Must sue for peace.

Hymer's kinsman demanded
That the leader of hosts

The sorrow-healing maid,
Who the asas' youth-preserving apples keeps,
Should bring to him.

Brisingamen's thief

Afterward brought Idun

To the gard of the giant.

Sorry were not the giants
After this had taken place,
Since from the south

Idun had come to the giants.
All the race

Of Yngve-Frey, at the Thing,
Grew old and gray,—
Ugly-looking were the gods.

Until the gods found the blood-dog,
Idun's decoying thrall,
And bound the maid's deceiver.
You shall, cunning Loke,
Spake Thor, die;
Unless back you lead.
With your tricks, that
Good joy-increasing maid.

Heard have I that thereupon
The friend of Honer flew
In the guise of a falcon

(He often deceived the asas with his cunning);
And the strong fraudulent giant,
The father of Morn,
With the wings of the eagle
Sped after the hawk's child.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 187

The holy gods soon built a fire—
They shaved off kindlings

—
And the giant was scorched.
This is said in memory
Of the dwarf's heel-bridge.*
A shield adorned with splendid lines
From Thorleif I received.

^GER'S FEAST.

How shall gold be named ? It may be called
^ger's fire; the needles of Glaser; Sifs hair;
Fulla's head-gear; Freyja's tears; the chatter, talk

or word of the giants ; Draupner's drop ; Draup-
ner's rain or shower; Freyja's eyes; the otter-

ransom, or stroke-ransom, of the asas; the seed

of Fyrisvold; Holge's how-roof; the fire of all

waters and of the hand; or the stone, rock or

gleam of the hand.

Why is gold called ^ger's fire? The saga
relating to this is, as has before been told, that

^ger made a visit to Asgard, but when he was

ready to return home he invited Odin and all
the asas to come and pay him a visit after the

lapse of three months. On this journey went
Odin, Njord, Frey, Tyr, Brage, Vidar, Loke ; and

also the asynjes, Frigg, Freyja, Ge^un, Skade,

Idun, Sif. Thor was not there, for he had gone
eastward to fight trolls. When the gods had
taken their seats, yEger let his servants bring in

* Shield.
^



188 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

on the liall floor bright gold, which shone and

lighted up the whole hall like fire, just as the

swords in Valhal are used instead of fire. Then

Loke bandied hasty words wdth all the gods, and

slew ^fi^er's thrall who was called Fimafensr. The
name of his other thrall is Elder. The name of

^ger's wife is Ran, and they have nine daugh-

ters, as has befoi*e been written. At this feast
all things passed around spontaneously, both food

and ale and all the utensils needed for the feast-

ing. Then the asas became aware that Ran had
a net in which she caught all men who perish at
sea. Then the saga goes on telling how it hap-
pens that gold is called the fire, or light or bright-
ness of ^ger, of Ran, or of ^ger's daughters ;
and from these periphrases it is allowed to call

gold the fire of the sea, or of any of the periphrases
of the sea, since ^ger and Ran are found in peri-
phrases of the sea ; and thus gold is now called
the fire of waters, of rivers, or of all the peri-

phrases of rivers. But these names have fared

like other periphrases The younger skald has

composed poetry after the pattern of the old

skalds, imitating their songs ; but afterward they
have expanded the metaphors whenever they

thought they could improve upon what was sung
before

;
and thus the water is the sea, the nver is

the lakes, the brook is the river. Hence all the

figures that are expanded more than what has



THE POETICAL DICTION. 189

before been found are called new tropes, and all

seem good tliat contain likeliliood and are natural.

Thus sang the skald Brage :

From the king I received
The fire of the brook.

This the king gave to me
And a head with song.

Why is gold called the needles or leaves of
Glaser ? In Asgard, before the doors of Valhal,
stands a grove which is called Glaser, and all its

leaves are of red gold, as is here sung :

Glaser stands

With golden leaves
Before Sigtyr's halls.

This is the fairest forest among gods and men.

LORE'S WAGER WITH THE DWARFS.

Why is gold called Sifs hair ? Loke Laufey's
son had once craftily cut all the hair off Sif; but

when Thor found it out he seized Loke, and

would have broken every bone in him, had he

not pledged himself with an oath to get the

swarthy elves to make for Sif a hair of gold that

should grow like other hair. Then went Loke

to the dwarfs that are called Ivald's sons, and

they made the hair and Skidbladner, and the

spear that Odin owned and is called Gungner.

Thereupon Loke wagered his head with the dwarf,



190 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

who hight Brok, that his brother Sindre would
not be able to make three other treasures equally
as good as these were. But when they came to
the smithy, Sindre laid a pig-skin in the furnace

and requested Brok to blow the bellows, and not

to stop blowing before he (Sindre) had taken out

of the furnace what he had put into it. As soon,
however, as Sindre had srone out of the smithv

and Brok was blowing, a fly lighted on his hand

and stung him ; but he kept on blowing as before

until the smith had taken the work out of the

furnace. That was now a boar, and its bristles
were of gold. Thereupon he laid gold in the fur-

nace, and requested Brok to blow, and not to stop

plying the bellows before he came back. He
went out

;
but then came the fly and lighted on

his neck and stung him still worse ; but he con-

tinued to work the bellows until the smith took

out of the furnace the gold ring called Draupner.
Then Sindre placed iron in the furnace, and re-

quested Brok to work the bellows, adding that

otherwise all would be worthless. Now the fly
lighted between his eyes and stung his eye-lids,
and as the blood ran down into his eyes so that
he could not see, he let go of the bellows just for

a moment and drove the fly away with his hands.
Then the smith came back and said that all that

lay in the furnace came near being entirely spoiled.

Thereupon he took a hammer out of the furnace.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 191

All these treasures he then placed in the hands

of his brother Brok, and bade him go with Loke

to Asgard to fetch the wager. When Loke and
Brok brought forth the treasures, the gods seated

themselves upon their doom-steads. It was agreed
to abide by the decision which should be pro-
nounced by Odin, Thor and Frey. Loke gave to
Odin the spear Gungner, to Thor the hair, which

Sif was to have, and to Frey, Skidbladner; and

he described the qualities of all these treasures,

stating that the spear never would miss its mark,
that the hair would grow as soon as it was placed
on Sif's head, and that Skidbladner would always
have fair wind as soon as the sails were hoisted,
no matter where its owner desired to go ; besides,
the ship could be folded together like a napkin
and be carried in his pocket if he desired. Then
Brok produced his treasures. He gave to Odin
the ring, saying that every ninth night eight other

rings as heavy as it would drop from it ; to Frey
he gave the boar, stating that it would run through
the air and over seas, by night or by day, faster
than any horse; and never could it become so dark

in the night, or in the worlds of darkness, but

that it would be light where this boar was pres-
ent, so bright shone his bristles. Then he gave
to Thor the hammer, and said that he might strike

with it as hard as he pleased ; no matter what was

before him, the hammer would take no scathe,



192 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

and wherever he might throw it he would never

lose it
;

it would never fly so far that it did not

return to his hand
;
and if he desired, it would

become so small that he might conceal it in his

bosom
;
but it had one fault, which was, that the

handle was rather short. The decision of the

gods was, that the hammer was the best of all
these treasures and the greatest protection against
the frost-giants, and they declared that the dwarf

had fairly won the wager. Then Loke offered to
ransom his head. The dwarf answered saying
there was no hope for him on that score. Take

me, then ! said Loke ; but when the dwarf was to

seize him Loke was far away, for he had the shoes

with which he could run through the air and

over the sea. Then the dwarf requested Thor to
seize him, and he did so. Now the dwarf wanted
to cut the head off Loke, but Loke said that the

head was his, but not the neck. Then the dwarf
took thread and a knife and wanted to pierce
holes in Loke's lips, so as to sew his mouth to-

gether, but the knife would not cut. Then said

he, it would be better if he had his brother's awl,
and as soon as he named it the awl was there
and it pierced Loke's lips. Now Brok sewed
Loke's mouth together, and broke oft' the thread

at the end of the sewing. The thread with which
the mouth of Loke was sewed together is called

Vartare (a strap).



THE POETICAL DICTION. 193

THE NIFLUNGS AND GJUKUNGS.

The following is the reason why gold is called
otter-ransom: It is related that three asas went

abroad to learn to know the whole world, Odin,
Honer and Loke. They came to a river, and

walked along the river-bank to a force, and near

the force was an otter. The otter had caught
a salmon in the force, and sat eating it with his

eyes closed. Loke picked up a stone, threw it at

the otter and hit him in the head. Loke bragged
of his chase, for he had secured an otter and a

salmon with one throw. They took the salmon

and the otter with them, and came to a byre,
where they entered. But the name of the bonde
who lived there was Hreidmar. He was a mighty
man, and thoroughly skilled in the black art.

The asas asked for night-lodgings, stating that

they had plenty of food, and showed the bonde

their game. But when Hreidmar saw the otter
he called his sons, Fafher and Begin, and said

that Otter, their brother, was slain, and also told

who had done it. Then the father and the sons
attacked the asas, seized them and bound them,
and then said, in reference to the otter, that he

was Hreidmar's son. The asas offered, as a ransom
for their lives, as much money as Hreidmar him-
self might demand, and this was agreed to, and

confirmed with an oath. Then the otter was



194 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

flayed. Hreidmar took the otter-belg and said

to them that they should fill the belg with red

gold, and then cover it with the same metal, and

when this was done they should be set free.

Thereupon Odin sent Loke to the home of the

swarthy elves, and he came to the dwarf whose

name is Andvare, and who lived as a fish, in the
water. Loke caught him in his hands, and de-
manded of him, as a ransom for his life, all the

gold that he had in his rock. And when they
entered the rock, the dwarf produced all the gold
that he owned, and that was a very large amount.

Then the dwarf concealed in his hand a small

gold ring. Loke saw this, and requested him to

hand forth the ring. The dwarf begged him not

to take the ring away from him, for with this

ring he could increase his wealth again if he

kept it. Loke said the dwarf should not keep
as much as a penny, took the ring from him and
went out. But the dwarf said that that ring
should be the bane of every one who possessed
it. Loke replied that he was glad of this, and

said that all should be fulfilled according to his

prophecy : he would take care to bring the curse

to the ears of him who was to receive it. He
went to Hreidmar and showed Odin the gold; but

when the latter saw the ring, it seemed to him
a fair one, and he took it and put it aside, giving
Hreidmar the rest of the gold. They filled the



THE POETICAL DICTION. 195

otter-beig as full as it would hold, and raised

it up when it was full. Then came Odin, and
was to cover the belg with gold ; and when this
was done, he requested Hreidmar to come and

see whether the belg was sufficiently covered.

But Hreidmar looked at it, examined it closely,
and saw a mouth-hair, and demanded that it
should be covered, too, otherwise the agreement
would be broken. Then Odin brought forth
the ring and covered with it the mouth-hair,

saying that now they had paid the otter-ransom.
But when Odin had taken his spear, and Loke
his shoes, so that they had nothing more to fear,
Loke said that the curse that Andvare had pro-
nounced should be fulfilled, and that the ring
and that gold should be the bane of its possess-
or

;
and this curse was afterward fulfilled. This

explains why gold is called the otter-ransom, or
forced payment of the asas, or strife-metal.

What more is there to be told of this gold ?
Hreidmar accepted the gold as a ransom for his

son, but Fafner and Regin demanded their share

,
of it as a ransom for their brother. Hreidmar was,

however, unwilling to give them as much as a

penny of it. Then the brothers made an agree-
ment to kill their father for the sake of the gold.
When this was done, Regin demanded that Faf-
ner should give him one half of it. Fafner an-

swered that there was but little hope that he



196 THE YOUJJ^GER EDDA.

would share the gold with his brother, since he

had himself slain his father to obtain it
;
and he

commanded E-egin to get him gone, for else the
same thing would happen to him as had hap-
pened to Hreidmar. Fafner had taken the sword

hight Hrotte, and the helmet which had belonged
to his father, and the latter he had placed on his

head. This was called the ^ger's helmet, and

it was a terror to all living to behold it. Regin
had the sword called Refil. With it he fled.
But Fafner went to Gnita-heath (the glittering

heath), where he made himself a bed, took on
him the likeness of a serpent (dragon), and lay

brooding over the gold.

Regin then went to Thjode, to king Hjalprek,
and became his smith. There he undertook the

fostering of Sigurd (Sigfrid), the son of Sigmund,
the son of Volsung and the son of Hjordis, the

daughter of Eylime. Sigurd was the mightiest
of all the kings of hosts, in respect to both family
and power and mind. Regin explained to him

where Fafner was lying on the gold, and egged
him on to try to get possession thereof Then

Regin made the sword which is hight Gram

(wrath), and which was so sharp that when

Sigurd held it in the flowing stream it cut asun-

der a tuft of wool which the current carried down

against the sword's edge. In the next place,

Sigurd cut with his sword Regin's anvil in twain.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 197

Thereupon Sigurd and Regin repaired to Gnita-

heath. Here Sigurd dug a ditch in Fafner's path
and sat down in it

;
so when Fafner crept to the

water and came directly over this ditch, Sigurd

pierced him with the sword, and this thrust caused

his death. Then Regin came and declared that

Sigurd had slain his brother, and demanded of

him as a ransom that he should cut out Fafner's

heart and roast it on the fire
;
but Regin kneeled

down, drank Fafner's blood, and laid himself

down to sleep. While Sigurd was roasting the

heart, and thought that it must be done, he

touched it with his finger to see how tender it
was

;
but the fat oozed out of the heart and onto

his finger and burnt it, so that he thrust his finger
into his mouth. The heart-blood came in contact

with his tongue, which made him comprehend the

speech of birds, and he understood what the

eagles said that were sitting in the trees. One
of the birds said :

There sits Sigurd,
Stained with blood.

On the fire is roasting
Fafner's heart.

Wise seemed to me
The ring-destroyer,
If he the shining
Heart would eat.

Another eagle sang :

There lies Regin,

Contemplating



198 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

How to deceive the man
Who trusts him;
Thinks in his wrath

Of false accusations.
The evil smith plots
Revenge 'gainst the brother.*

Then Sigurd went to Regin and slew him, and

thereupon he mounted his horse hight Grane, and

rode until he came to Fafner's bed, took out all

the gold, packed it in two bags and laid it on

Grane's back, then got on himself and rode away.
Now is told the saga according to which gold is
called Fafner's bed or lair, the metal of Gnita-

heath, or Grane's burden.

Then Sigurd rode on until he found a house on

the mountain. In it slept a woman clad in hel-
met and coat-of-mail. He drew his sword and
cut the coat-ofmail off from her. Then she

awaked and called herself Hild. Her name was

Brynhild, and she was a valkyrie. Thence Sigurd
rode on and came to the king whose name was

Gjuke. His wife was called Grimhild, and their

children were Gunnar, Hogne, Gudrun, Gudny;
Gothorm was Gjuke's step-son. Here Sigurd re-

mained a long time. Then he got the hand of

Gudrun, Gjuke's daughter, and Gunnar and

Hogne entered into a sworn brotherhood with

Sigurd. Afterward Sigurd and the sons of Gjuke
went to Atle, Budle's son, to ask for his sister,

* Elder Edda: the Lay of Fafner, 33, 33.



THE POETICAL BICTION. 199

Brynhild, for Gunnar's wife. She sat on Hind-

fell, and her hall was surrounded by the bicker-

ing flame called the Vafurloge, and she had made

a solemn promise not to wed any other man than
him who dared to ride through the bickering
flame. Then Sigurd and the Gjukungs (they are

also called Niflungs) rode upon the mountain, and

there Gunnar was to ride through the Vafurloge.
He had the horse that was called Gote, but this
horse did not dare to run into the flame. So

Sigurd and Gunnar changed form and weapons,
for Grane would not take a step under any other

man than Sigurd. Then Sigurd mounted Grane

and rode through the bickering flame. That same

evening he held a wedding with Brynhild ; but

when they went to bed he drew his sword Gram
from the sheath and placed it between them. In

the morning when he had arisen, and had donned

his clothes, he gave to Brynhild, as a bridal gift,
the gold ring that Loke had taken from Andvare,
and he received another ring as a memento from

her. Then Sigurd mounted his horse and rode to

his companions. He and Gunnar exchanged forms

again and went back to Gjuke with Brynhild.

Sigurd had two children with Gudrun. Their

names were Sigmund and Swanhild.

Once it happened that Brynhild and Gudrun

went to the water to wash their hair. When

they came to the river Brynhild waded fi'om the



200 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

river bank into the stream, and said that she

could not bear to have that vrater in her hair that

ran from Gudrun's hair, for she had a more high-
minded husband. Then Gudrun followed her

into the stream, and said that she was entitled

to wash her hair farther up the stream than

Brynhild, for the reason that she had the hus-

band who was bolder than Gunnar, or any other
man in the world

;
for it was he who slew Fafner

and Eegin, and inherited the wealth of both.

Then answered Brynhild : A greater deed it was
that Gunnar rode through the Vafurloge, which

Sigurd did not dare to do. Then laughed Gud-

run and said: Do you think it was Gunnar
who rode through the bickering flame ? Then I
think you shared the bed with him who gave me
this gold ring. The gold ring which you have
on your finger, and which you received as a

bridal-gift, is called Andvaranaut (Andvare's

Gift), and I do not think Gunnar got it on Gnita-

heath. Then Brynhild became silent and went

home. Thereupon she egged Gunnar and Hogne
to kill Sigurd ; but being sworn brothers of

Sigurd, they egged Guthorm, their brother, to

slay Sigurd. Guthorm pierced him with his

sword while he was sleeping; but as soon as

Sigurd was wounded he threw his sword, Gram,
after Guthorm, so that it cut him in twain

through the middle. There Sigurd fell, and his



THE POETICAL DICTION. 201

son, three winters old, by name Sigmund, whom

they also killed. Then Brynhild pierced herself
with the sword and was cremated with Sigurd.
But Gunnar and Hogne inherited Fafner's gold
and the Gift of Andvare, and now ruled the
lands.

King Atle, Budle's son, Brynhild's brother, then

got in marriage Gudrun, who had been Sigurd's
wife, and they had children. King Atle invited
Gunnar and Hogne to visit him, and they accept-
ed his invitation. But before they started on

their journey they concealed Fafner's hoard in

the Bhine, and that gold has never since been

found. King Atle had gathered together an

army and fought a battle with Gunnar and

Hogne, and they were captured. Atle had the

heart cut out of Hogne alive. This was his

death. Gunnar he threw into a den of snakes,
but a harp was secretly brought to him, and he

played the harp with his toes (for his hands were

fettered), so that all the snakes fell asleep except-

ing the adder, which rushed at him and bit him
in the breast, and then thrust its head into the

wound and clung to his liver until he died. Gun-
nar and Hogne are called Niflungs (Niblungs)
and Gjukungs. Hence gold is called the Niflung
treasure or inheritance. A little later Gudrun
slew her two sons and made from their skulls

goblets trimmed with gold, and thereupon the



202 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

funeral ceremonies took place. At the feast, Gud-
run poured for King Atle in these goblets mead
that was mixed with the blood of the youths.
Their hearts she roasted and gave to the king
to eat. When this was done she told him all
about it, with many unkind words. There was
no lack of strong mead, so that the most of the

people sitting there fell asleep. On that night
she went to the king when he had fallen asleep,
and had with her her son Hogne. They slew

him, and thus he ended his life. Then they set
fire to the hall, and with it all the people who
were in it were burned. Then she went to the sea
and sprang into the water to drown herself; but

she was carried across the fjord, and came to the

land which belono;ed to Kins: Jonaker. When
he saw her he took her home and made her his
wife. They had three children, whose names

were Sorle, Hamder and Erp. They all had hair
as black as ravens, like Gunnar and Hogne and
the other Niflungs.

There was fostered Swanhild, the daughter of

Sigurd, and she was the fairest of all women.

That Jormunrek, the rich, found out. He sent
his son, Eandver, to ask for her hand for him;
and when he came to Jonaker, Swanhild was
delivered to him, so that he might bring her to

King Jormunrek. Then said Bikke that it would

be more fitting that Kandver should marry Swan-



THE POETICAL DICTION. 203

hild, he being young and she too, but Jormun-

rek being old. This plan pleased the two young

people well. Soon afterward Bikke informed the

king of it, and so King Jormunrek seized his son

and had him brought to the gallows. Then
Randver took his hawk, plucked the feathers off

him, and requested that it should be sent to his

father, whereupon he w^as hanged. But when

King Jormunrek saw the hawk, it came to his
mind that as the hawk was flightless and feather-

less, so his kingdom was without preservation ; for

he was old and sonless. Then King Jormunrek

riding out of the woods from the chase with his

courtiers, while Queen Swanhild sat dressing her

hair, had the courtiers ride onto her, and she was

trampled to death beneath the feet of the horses.

When Gudrun heard of this, she begged her sons
to avenge Swanhild. While they were busking
themselves for the journey, she brought them

byrnies and helmets, so strong that iron could not

scathe them. She laid the plan for them, that

when they came to King Jormunrek, they should
attack him in the night whilst he was sleeping.
Sorle and Hamder should cut off his hands and

feet, and Erp his head. On the way they asked

Erp what assistance they were to get from him,
when they came to King Jormunrek. He an-
swered them that he Avould give them such as-

sistance as the hand gives the foot. They said



204 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

that the feet got no support from the hands

whatsoever. They were angry at their mother,
because she had forced them to undertake this

journey with harsh words, and hence they were

going to do that which would displease her most.

So they killed Erp, for she loved him the most.
A little later, while Sorle was walking, he slipped
with one foot, and in falling supported himself

with his hands. Then said he : Now the hands
helped the foot ; better were it now if Erp were

living. When they came to Jormunrek, the king,
in the night, while he was sleeping, they cut off

both his hands and his feet. Then he awaked,
called his men and bade them arise. Said Ham-
der then: The head would now have been off
had Erp lived. The courtiers got up, attacked

them, but could not overcome them with weapons.
Then Jormunrek cried to them that they should
stone them to death. This was done, Sorle and
Hamder fell, and thus perished the last descend-
ants of Gjuke.

After King Sigurd lived a daughter hight

Aslaug, who was fostered at Heimer's in Hlym-
daler. From her mighty races are descended.
It is said that Sigmund, the son of Volsung, was

so powerful, that he drank venom and received
no harm therefrom. But Sinfjotle, his son, and

Sigurd, were so hard-skinned that no venom com-



THE POETICAL DICTION. 205

ing onto them could harm them. Therefore the
skald Brage has sung as follows :

When the tortuous serpent,
Full of the drink of the Volsungs,*

Hung in coils
On the bait of the giant-slayer.f

Upon these sagas very many skalds have made

lays, and from them they have taken various

themes. Brage the Old made the following song
about the fall of Sorle and Hamder in the drapa,
which he composed about Ragnar Lodbrok :

Jormunrek once,
In an evil dream, waked
In that sword-contest

Against the blood-stained kings.
A clashing of arms was heard
In the house of Randver's father,
When the raven-blue brothers of Erp
The insult avenged.

Sword-dew flowed

OS the bed on the floor.
Bloody hands and feet of the king
One saw cut off.
On his head fell Jormunrek,
Frothing in blood.

On the shield
This is painted.

The king saw

Men so stand
That a ring they made
'Round his house.

* The drink of the Volsungs = venom ; the tortuous venom-
eerpent = the Midgard-serpent.

tThor.



206 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Sorle and Harader

Were both at once,
With sHppery stones,
Struck to the ground.

King Jormunrek

Ordered Gjuke's descendants

Violently to be stoned

When they came to take the life
Of Swanhild's husband.

All sought to pay
Jonaker's sons

With blows and wounds.

This fall of men
And sagas many
On the fair shield I see.

Ragnar gave me the shield.

MENJA AND FENJA.

Why is gold called Frode's meal ? The saga
giving rise to this is the following :

Odin had a son by name Skjold, from whom
the Skjoldungs are descended. He had his throne
and ruled in the lands that are now called Den-

mark, but were then called Gotland. Skjold had

a son by name Fridleif, who ruled the lands
after him. Fridleif's son was Frode. He took
the kingdom after his father, at the time when
the Emperor Augustus established peace in all

the earth and Christ was born. But Frode being
the mightiest king in the northlands, this peace
was attributed to him by all who spake the
Danish tongue, and the Norsemen called it the



THE POETICAL DICTION. 207

peace of Frode. No man injured the other, even

though he might meet, loose or in chains, his

father's or brother's bane. There was no thief

or robber, so that a gold ring would be a long
time on Jalanger's heath. King Frode sent mes-

sengers to Svithjod, to the king whose name was

Fjolner, and bought there two maid-servants,
whose names were Fenja and Menja. They were

large and strong. About this time were found
in Denmark two mill-stones, so large that no one
had the strength to turn them. But the nature

belonged to these mill-stones that they ground
whatever was demanded of them by the miller.
The name of this mill was Grotte. But the man
to whom King Frode gave the mill was called

Hengekjapt. King Frode had the maid-servants

led to the mill, and requested them to grind for

him gold and peace, and Frode's happiness. Then

he gave them no longer time to rest or sleep
than while the cuckoo was silent or while they

sang a song. It is said that they sang the song
called the Grottesong, and before they ended it

they ground out a host against Frode; so that

on the same night there came the sea-king, whose

name was Mysing, and slew Frode and took a
large amount of booty. Therewith the Frode-

peace ended. Mysing took with him Grotte, and

also Fenja and Menja, and bade them grind salt,
and in the middle of the night they asked Mysing



208 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

whether he did not have salt enough. He bade
them grind more. They ground only a short

time longer before the ship sank. But in the

ocean arose a whirlpool (Maelstrom, mill-stream)
in the place where the sea runs into the mill-eye.
Thus the sea became salt.

THE GROrrESONG.

Now are come
To the house of the king
The prescient two,

Fenja and Menja.
There must the mighty
Maidens toil

For King Erode,
Fridleif8 son.

Brought to the mill

Soon they were;
The gray stones

They had to turn.

Nor rest nor peace
He gave to them:
He would hear the maidens
Turn the mill.

They turned the mill.
The prattling stones

The mill ever rattling.
What a noise it made!

Lay the planks!
Lift the stones! *

* These words are spoken by the maidens while they put the mill

together.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 209

But he* bade the maids
Yet more to grind.

They sang and swung
The swift mill-stone,
So that Frode's folk

Fell asleep.

Then, when she came
To the mill to grind,
With a hard heart
And with loud voice
Did Menja sing:

We grind for Frode
Wealth and happiness,
And gold abundant
On the mill of luck.
Dance on roses!

Sleep on down!
Wake when you please!
That is well ground.

Here shall no one
Hurt the other.
Nor in ambush lie,
Nor seek to kill;
Nor shall any one
With sharp sword hew,
Though bound he should find
His brother's bane.

They stood in the hall,
Their hands were resting;
Then was it the first
Word that he spoke:
Sleep not longer
Than the cuckoo on the hall,
Or only while
A song I sing:

* Frode.



210 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Frode! you were not

Wary enough,—
You friend of men,—
When maids you bought!

,
At their strength you looked,
And at their fair faces,
But you asked no questions
About their descent.

Hard was Hrungner
And his father;
Yet was Thjasse

Stronger than they.
And Ide and Orner,
Our friends, and

The mountain-giants' brothers,
Who fostered us two.

Not would Grotte have come

From the mountain gray,
Nor this hard stone
Out from the earth;
The maids of the mountain-giants
Would not thus be grinding
If we two knew

Nothing of the mill.

Through winters nine

Our strength increased,
While below the sod

We played together.
Great deeds were the maids

Able to perform;
Mountains they
From their places moved.

The stone we rolled
From the giants' dwelling,
So that all the earth

Did rock and quake.



THE POETICAL DICTION. 211

So we hurled
The rattling stone,
The heavy block,
That men caught it.

In Svithjod's land

Afterward we
Fire-wise women.
Fared to the battle,

Byrnies we burst.
Shields we cleaved,
Made our way
Through gray-clad hosts.

One chief we slew.
Another we aided,—
To Guthorni the Good

Help we gave.
Ere Knue had fallen
Nor rest we got.
Then bound we were
And taken prisoners.

Such were our deeds

In former days,
That we heroes brave
Were thought to be.
With spears sharp
Heroes we pierced,
So the gore did run

And our swords grew red.

Now we are come
To the house of the king,
No one us pities.
Bond-women are we.
Dirt eats our feet.
Our limbs are cold,
The peace-giver* we turn.
Hard it is at Frode's.

* The mill.



212 THE YOUNGER EDDA

The hands shall stop,
The stone shall stand;
Now have I ground
For my part enough.
Yet to the hands

No rest must be given,
'Till Frode thinks

Enough has been ground.

Now hold shall the hands
The lances hard,
The weapons bloody,

—
Wake now, Frode!
Wake now, Frode!
If you would listen

To our songs,—
To sayings old.

Fire I see burn

East of the burg,—
The warnews are awake.

That is called warning.
A host hither
Hastily approaches
To burn the king's
Lofty dwelling

No longer you will sit
On the throne of Hleidra
And rule o'er red

Rings and the mill.

Now must we grind
With all our might,
No warmth will we get
From the blood of the slain.

Now my father's daughter
Bravely turns the mill.

The death of many
Men she sees.



THE POETICAL DICTION.

Now broke the large
Braces 'neath the mill,

—
The iron-bound braces.
Let us yet grind!

Let us yet grind!
Yrsa's son

Shall on Frode revenge
Halfdan's death.

He shall Yrsa's

Ofifspring be named,
And yet Yrsa's brother.
Both of us know it.

The mill turned the maidens,—
Their might they tested;
Young they were,
And giantesses wild.
The braces trembled.
Then fell the mill,—
In twain was broken
The heavy stone.

All the old world

Shook and trembled,
But the giant's maid

Speedily said:

We have turned the mill, Frode!
Now we may stop.
By the mill long enough
The maidens have stood.



214 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

ROLF KRAKE.

A king in Denmark hight Rolf Krake, and
was the most famous of all kings of olden times ;

moreover, he was more mild, brave and conde-

scending than all other men. A proof of his con-
descension, which is very often spoken of in olden

stories, was the following: There was a poor
little fellow by name Vog. He once came into

King Rolfs hall while the king was yet a young
man, and of rather delicate growth. Then Vog
went before him and looked up at him. Then
said the king: What do you mean to say, my
fellow, by looking so at me? Answered Vog:
When I was at home I heard people say that

King Rolf, at Hleidra, was the greatest man in
the northlands, but now sits here in the high-seat
a little crow (krake), and it they call theii' king.
Then made answer the king: You, my fellow,
have given me a name, and I shall henceforth be
called Rolf Krake, but it is customary that a gift

accompanies the name. Seeing that you have no

gift that you can give me with the name, or that
would be suitable to me, then he who has must

give to the other. Then he took a gold ring off

his hand and gave it to the churl. Then said

Vog : You give as the best king of all, and there-
fore I now pledge myself to become the bane of



THE POETICAL DICTION^. 215

him who becomes your bane. Said tbe king,
laughing : A small thing makes Vog happy.

Another example is told of E,olf Krake's brav-

ery. In Upsala reigned a king by name Adils,
whose wife was Yrsa, Rolf Krake's mother. He
was engaged in a war with Norway's king, Ale.

They fought a battle on the ice of the lake called
Wenern. King Adils sent a message to Rolf

Krake, his stepson, asking him to come and help
him, and promising to furnish pay for his whole

army during the campaign. Furthermore King
Rolf himself should have any three treasures that

he might choose in Sweden. But Rolf Krake

could not go to his assistance, on account of the

war which he was then waging against the
Saxons. Still he sent twelve berserks to King
Adils. Among them were Bodvar Bjarke, Hjalte
the Valiant, Hvitserk the Keen, Vot, Vidsete, and

the brothers Svipday and Beigud. In that war
fell King Ale and a large part of his army. Then

King Adils took from the dead King Ale the
helmet called Hildesvin, and his horse called

Rafn. Then the berserks each demanded three

pounds of gold in pay for their service, and also

asked for the treasures which they had chosen

for Rolf Krake, and which they now desired to

bring to him. These were the helmet Hildegolt ;
the byrnie Finnsleif, which no steel could scathe ;
and the gold ring called Sviagris, which had



216 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

belonged to Adils' forefathers. But the king
refused to surrender any of these treasures, nor

did he give the berserks any pay. The berserks

then returned home, and were much dissatisfied.

They reported all to King Rolf, who straightway
busked himself to fare against Upsala ; and when
he came with his ships into the river Fyre, he

rode against Upsala, and with him his twelve

berserks, all peaceless. Yrsa, his mother, received

him and took him to his lodgings, but not to the

king's hall. Large fires were kindled for them,
and ale was brought them to drink. Then came

King Adils' men in and bore fuel onto the fire-

place, and made a fire so great that it burnt the

clothes of Rolf and his berserks, saying: Is it

true that neither fire nor steel will put Rolf

Krake and his berserks to flight? Then Rolf

Krake and all his men sprang up, and he said :

Let us increase the blaze

In Adils' chambers.

He took his shield and cast it into the fire, and

sprang over the fire while the shield was burn-

ing, and cried :

From the fire flees not he
Who over it leaps.

The same did also his men, one after the other,
and then they took those who had put fuel on
the fire and cast them into it. Now Yrsa came



THE POETICAL DICTION. 217

and handed Rolf Krake a deer's horn full of

gold, and with it she gave him the ring Sviagris,
and requested them to ride straightway to their

army. They sprang upon their horses and rode

away over the Fyrisvold. Then they saw that

King Adils was riding after them with his whole

army, all armed, and was going to slay them.

Rolf Krake took gold out of the horn with his

right hand, and scattered it over the whole way.
But when the Swedes saw it they leaped out of
their saddles, and each one took as much as he
could. King Adils bade them ride, and he him-

self rode on with all his might. The name of
his horse was Slungner, the fastest of all horses.

When Rolf Krake saw that King Adils was

riding near him, he took the ring Sviagris and

threw it to him, asking him to take it as a gift.

King Adils rode to the ring, picked it up with

the end of his spear, and let it slide down to his
hand. Then Rolf Krake turned round and saw

that the other was stooping. Said he: Like a

swine I have now bended the foremost of all
Swedes. Thus they parted. Hence gold is called

the seed of Krake or of Fyrisvold.



218 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

HOGNE AND HILD.

A king by name Hogne had a daughter by
name Hild. Her a king, by name Hedin, son

of Hjarrande, made a prisoner of war, while

King Hogne had fared to the trysting of the

kings. But when he learned that thei'e had been

harrying in his kingdom, and that his daughter
had been taken away, he rode with his army in

search of Hedin, and learned that he had sailed

northward along the coast. When King Hogne
came to Norway, he found out that Hedin had

sailed westward into the sea. Then Hogne sailed
after him to the Orkneys. And when he came
to the island called Ha, then Hedin was there

before him with his host. Then Hild went to

meet her father, and offered him as a reconcilia-
tion from Hedin a necklace

;
but if he was not

willing to accept this, she said that Hedin was

prepared for a battle, and Hogne might expect
no clemency from him. Hogne answered his

daughter harshly. When she returned to Hedin,
she told him that Hogne would not be reconciled,
and bade him busk himself for the battle. And so
both parties did ; they landed on the island and

marshaled their hosts. Then Hedin called to

Hogne, his father-in-law, offering him a reconcilia-

tion and much gold as a ransom. Hogne an-



THE POETICAL DICTION. 219

swered: Too late do you offer to make peace
witli me, for now I have drawn the sword Dains-

leif, which was smithied by the dwarfs, and must
be the death of a man whenever it is drawn

;
its

blows never miss the mark, and the wounds
made by it never heal. Said Hedin : You boast
the sword, but not the victory. That I call a

good sword that is always faithful to its master

Then they began the hattle which is called the

Hjadninga-vig (the slaying of the Hedimans) ;

they fought the whole day, and in the evening
the kings fared back to their ships. But in the

night Hild went to the battlefield, and waked

up with sorcery all the dead that had fallen.

The next day the kings went to the battlefield
and fought, and so did also all they who had
fallen the day before. Thus the battle continued

from day to day ; and all they who fell, and all
the swords that lay on the fielS of battle, and

all the shields, became stone. But as soon as

day dawned all the dead arose again and fought,
and all the weapons became new again, and in

songs it is said that the Hjadnings will so con-

tinue until Bagnarok.





NOTES

ENEA.

The Enea mentioned in the Foreword to Gylfe's
Fooling refers to the settlement of western Europe,
where JEneas is said to have founded a city on the

Tiber. Bergmann, however, in his Fascination de

Gulfi, page 28, refers it to the Thracian town Ainos.

HERIKON.

Herikon is undoubtedly a mutilated form for Erich-

thonios. The genealogy here given corresponds with
the one given in the Iliad, Book 20, 215.

THE HISTORICAL ODIN.

The historical or anthropomorphized Odin, de-
scribed in the Foreword to the Fooling of Gylfe, be-

comes interesting when we compare it with Snorre's
account of that hero in Heimskringla, and then com-

pare both accounts with the Roman traditions about
^neas. Of course the whole story is only a myth;
but we should remember that in the minds and hearts
of our ancestors it served every purpose of genuine

history. Our fathers accepted it in as good faith as

any christian ever believed in the gospel of Christ,
and so it had a similar influence in moulding the

social, religious, political and literary life of our an-

cestors. "We become interested in this legend as
221



222 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

much as if it were genuine history, on account of the
influence it wielded upon the minds and hearts of a
race destined to act so great a part in the social,

religious and political drama of Europe. We look
into this and other ancestral myths, and see mirrored
in them all that we afterward find to be reliable

history of the old Teutons. In the same manner we
are interested in the story told about Komulus and

Eemus, about Mars and the wolf. This Roman myth
is equally prophetic in reference to the future career

of Rome. The warlike Mars, the rapacity of the

wolf, and the fratricide Romulus, form a mirror in

which we see reflected the whole historical develop-
ment of the Romans

;
so that the story of Romulus

is a vest-pocket edition of the history of Rome.
There are many points of resemblance between

this old story of Odin and the account that Yirgil

gives us of ^neas, the founder of the Latin race ; and

it is believed that, while Virgil imitated Homer, he
based his poem upon a legend current among his

countrymen. The Greeks in Virgil's poem are Pom-

pey and the Romans in our Teutonic story. The

Trojans correspond to Mithridates and his allies,

^neas and Odin are identical. Just as Odin, a heroic
defender of Mithridates, after traversing various un-

known countries, finally reaches the north of Europe,
organizes the various Teutonic kingdoms, settles his

sons upon the thrones of Germany, England, Den-

mark, Sweden and Norway, and instructs his people
to gather strength and courage, so as eventually to

take revenge on the cursed Romans ; so ^neas,
one of the most valiant defenders of Troy, after many
adventures in various lands, at length settles in Italy,



NOTES. 223

and becomes the founder of a race that in course of

time is to wreak vengeance upon the Greeks. The

prophecy contained in the Roman legend was fulfilled

by Metellus and Mummius, in the years 147 and 146
before Christ, when the Romans became the con-

querors of Greece. The prophecy contained in our
Teutonic legend foreshadowed with no less unrelent-

ing necessity the downfall of proud Rome, when the
Teutonic commander Odoacer, in the year 476 after

Christ, dethroned, not Romulus, brother of Remus,
but Romulus Augustulus, son of Orestes. Thus history
repeats itself. Roman history begins and ends with
Romulus

;
and we fancy we can see some connection

between Od-in and Od-oacer. ''As the twig is bent

the tree is inclined."

It might be interesting to institute a similar com-

parison between our Teutonic race-founder Odin and

Ulysses, king of Ithaca, but the reader will have to

do this for himself.

In one respect our heroes dififer. The fall of Troy
and the wanderings of Ulysses became the theme of
two great epic poems among the Greeks. The wan-

derings and adventures of ^neas, son of Anchises,
were fashioned into a lordly epic by Yirgil for the Ro-
mans. But the much-traveled man, the V/vtj/? r.oXo^por.oq^
the weapons and the hero, Odin, who, driven by the

norns, first came to Teutondom and to the Baltic

shores, has not yet been sung. This wonderful expe-
dition of our race-founder, which, by giving a historic
cause to all the later hostilities and conflicts between

the Teutons and the Romans, might, as suggested by
Gibbon, supply the noble ground-work of an epic

poem as thrilling as the ^neid of Yirgil, has not yet



224 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

been woven into a song for our race, and we give our
readers this full account of Odin from the Heims-

kringla in connection with the Foreword to Gjlfe's
Fooling, with the hope that among our readers there

may be found some descendant of Odin, whose skaldic

wings are but just fledged for the flights he hopes to

take, who will take a draught, first from Mimer's

gushing fountain, then from Suttung's mead, brought

by Odin to Asgard, and consecrate himself and his

talents to this legend with all the ardor of his soul.

For, as "William Morris so beautifully says of the Vol-

sung Saga, this is the great story of the Teutonic race,
and should be to us what the tale of Troy was to the

Greeks, and what the tale of JEneas was to the Eo-

mans, to all our race first and afterward, when the
evolution of the world has made the Teutonic race

nothing more than a name of what it has been ; a

story, too, then, should it be to the races that come
after us, no less than the Iliad, and the Odyssey and

the ^neid have been to us.'^ We sincerely trust that
we shall see Odin wrought into a Teutonic epic, that
will present in grand outline the contrast between

the Eoman and the Teuton. And now we are pre-
pared to give the Pleimskringla account of the his-

torical Odin. We have adopted Samuel Laing's
translation, with a few verbal alterations where such

seemed necessary.
It is said that the earth's circle (Heimskringla),

which the human race inhabits, is torn across into

many bights, so that great seas run into the land
from the out-ocean. Thus it is known that a great

*
Quoted from memory.



NOTES. 225

sea goes into Njorvasound,* and up to the land of

Jerusalem. From the same sea a long sea-bight
stretches toward the northeast, and is called the Black

Sea, and divides the three parts of the earth ; of which

the eastern part is called Asia, and the western is called

by some Europe, by some Enea.f Northward of the

Black Sea lies Svithjod the Great, $ or the Cold. The
Great Svithjod is reckoned by some not less than the

Saracens' land,§ others compare it to the Great Blue-

land.
II

The northern part of Svithjod lies uninhabited
on account of frost and cold, as likewise the southern

parts of Blueland are waste from the burning sun.

In Svithjod are many great domains, and many won-
derful races of men, and many kinds of languages.
There are giants, Tf and there are dwarfs,

'^^ and there

are also blue men.-ff There are wild beasts and dread-

fully large dragons. On the north side of the mount-
ains, which lie outside of all inhabited lands, runs a

river through Svithjod, which is properly called by
the name of Tanais, :!::}: but was formerly called Tana-

quisl or Yanaquisl, and which falls into the ocean at

*
Njorvasound, the Straits of Gibraltar; so called from the first

Norseman who sailed through them. His name was Njorve. See
Ann. for nordisk Oidkyndighed, Vol. I, p. 58,

t See note, page 221.
i Svithjod the Great, or the Cold, is the ancient Sarmatia and

Scythia Magna, and formed the great part of the present European
Russia. In the mythological sagas it is also called Godheim; that
is, the home of Odin and the other gods. Svithjod the Less is
Sweden proper, and is called Mannheim; that is, the home of the
kings, the descendants of the gods.

§ The Saracens' land (Serkland) means North Africa and Spain,
and the Saracen countries in Asia; that is, Persia, Assyria, etc.

II Blueland, the country of the blacks in Africa, the country south
of Serkland, the modern Ethiopia.
H Tartareans. ** Kalmuks. ff Mongohans.
Xt The Tanais is the present Don river, which empties into the

Sea of Asov.



226 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

the Black Sea. The country of the people on the

Yanaquisl was called Yanaland or Yanaheim, and the

river separates the three parts of the world, of which

the easternmost is called Asia and the westernmost

Europe.
The country east of the Tanaquisl in Asia was

called Asaland or Asaheim, and the chief city in that

land was called Asgard.* In that city was a chief

called Odin, and it was a great place for sacrifice.

It was the custom there that twelve temple-priests f
should both direct the sacrifices and also judge the

people. They were called priests or masters, and all
the people served and obeyed them. Odin was a

great and very far-traveled warrior, who conquered
many kingdoms, and so successful was he that in

every battle the victory was on his side. It was the

belief of his people that victory belonged to him in

every battle. It was his custom when he sent his
men into battle, or on any expedition, that he first
laid his hand upon their heads, and called down a

blessing upon them ; and then they believed their

undertaking would be successful. His people also

were accustomed, whenever they fell into danger by
land or sea, to call upon his name ; and they thought

*
Asgard is supposed, by those who look for historical fact in

mythological tales, to be the present Assor; others, that it is Chas-

gar in the Caucasian ridge, called by Strabo Aspargum the Asburg,
or castle of the asas. We still have in the Norse tongue the word
Aas, meaning a ridge of high land. The word asas is not derived
from Asia, as Snorre supposed. It is the 0. H. Ger. ans; Anglo-Sax.
OS = a hero. The word also means a pillar; and in this latter sense
the gods are the pillars of the universe. Connected with the word
is undoubtedly Aas, a mountain-ridge, as supporter of the skies; and
this reminds us of Atlas, as bearer of the world.

t The temple-priests performed the functions of priest and judge,
and their office continued hereditary throughout the heathen penod
of Norse history.



NOTES. 227

that always they got comfort and aid by it, for where

he was they thought help was near. Often he went

away so long that he passed many seasons on his

journeys.
Odin had two brothers, the one hight Ye, the other

Vile,"^^ and they governed the kingdom when he was
absent. It happened once when Odin had gone to
a great distance, and had been so long away that the

people of Asia doubted if he would ever return home,
that his two brothers took it upon themselves to di-
vide his estate

;
but both of them took his wife Frigg

to themselves. Odin soon after returned home, and
took his wife back.

Odin went out with a great army against the Yana-
land people ; but they were well prepared, and de-

fended their land, so that victory was changeable, and

they ravaged the lands of each other and did great

damage. They tired of this at last, and, on both sides

appointing a meeting for establishing peace, made a
truce and exchanged hostages. The Yanaland people
sent their best men,—Njord the Rich and his son Frey ;
the people of Asaland sent a man hight Keener, f as
he was a stout and very handsome man, and with
him they sent a man of great understanding, called
Mimer

;
and on the other side the Yanaland people

sent the wisest man in their community, who was
called Quaser. 'Now when Hoener came to Yanaheim
he was immediately made a chief, and Mimer came
to him with good counsel on all occasions. But when
Hcener stood in the Things, or other meetings, if

Mimer was not near him, and any difficult matter was

* See Norse Mythology, page 174.
. t See Brage's Talk, p. 160; and Norse Mythology, pp. 247 and 342.



228 THE YOUNGEK EDDA.

laid before him, he always answered in one way :
Now let others give their advice ; so that the Yana-
land people got a suspicion that the Asaland people
had deceived them in the exchange of men. They
took Mimer, therefore, and beheaded him, and sent

his head to the Asaland people. Odin took the head,
smeared it with herbs, so that it should not rot, and

sang incantations over it. Thereby lie gave it the

power that it spoke to him, and discovered to him

many secrets.* Odin placed Njord and Frey as priests
of the sacrifices, and they became deities of the Asa-

land people. Njord's daughter, Frej^ja, was priestess
of the sacrifices, and first taught the Asaland people
the magic art, as it was in use and fashion among the
Yanaland people. While Njord was with the Yana-

land people he had taken his own sister in marriage,
for that was allowed by their law ; and their children

were Frey and Freyja. But among the Asaland

people it was forbidden to come together in so near

relationship, t

There goes a great mountain barrier from northeast

to southwest, which divides the Great Svithjod from

other kingdoms. South of this mountain ridge is not

* In the Vala's Prophecy of the Elder Edda it is said that Odin
talks with the head of Mimer before the coming of Ragnarok. See
Norse Mythology, p. 421.

t This shows that the vans must have belonged to the mytholog-
ical system of some older race that, like the ancient Romans (Liber
and Libera), recognized the propriety of marriage between brothers
and sisters, at least among their gods. Such marriages were not
allowed among our Odinic ancestors. Hence we see that when Njord,
Frey and Freyja were admitted to Asgard, they entered into new mar-
riage relations. Njord married Skade, Frey married Gerd, and Freyja
married Oder. Our ancestors were never savages !



NOTES. 229

far to Turkland, where Odin had great possessions.*
But Odin, having foreknowledge and magic-sight, knew
that his posterity would come to settle and dwell in

the northern half of the world. In those times the

Roman chiefs went wide around the world, subduing
to themselves all people ; and on this account many
chiefs fled from their domains.f Odin set his brothers

* Turkland was usually supposed to mean Moldau and Wallachia.
Some, who regard the great mountain barrier as being the Ural
Mountains, think Turkland is Turkistan in Asia. Asia Minor is
also frequently styled Turkland.

t Ancient Norse writers connect this event with Mithridates and

Pompey the Great. They tell how Odin was a heroic prince who,
with his twelve peers or apostles, dwelt in the Black Sea region.
He became straightened for room, and so led the asas out of Asia
into eastern Europe. Then they go on to tell how the Roman empire
had arrived at its highest point of power, and saw all the then
known world— the orbis terrarum— subject to its laws, when an
unforeseen event raised up enemies against it from the very heart of
the forests of Scythia, and on the banks of the Don river. The
leader was Mithridates the Great, against whom the Romans waged
three wars, and the Romans looked upon him as the most formid-
able enemy the empire had ever had to contend with. Cicero delivered
his famous oration, Pro lege Manilla, and succeeded in getting Pom-
pey appointed commander of the third war against Mithridates.
The latter, by flying, had drawn Pompey after him into the wilds of
Scythia. Here the king of Pontus sought refuse and new means of
vengeance. He hoped to arm against the ambition of Rome all his
neighboring nations whose liberties she threatened. He was suc-
cessful at first, but all those Scythian peoples, ill-united as allies,
ill-armed as soldiers, and still worse disciplined, were at length
forced to yield to the genius of the great general Pompey. And here
traditions tell us that Odin and the other asas were among the allies
of Mithridates. Odin had been one of the gallant defenders of Troy,
and at the same time, with iEneas and Anchises, he had taken flight
out of the burning and falling city. Now he was obliged to withdraw
a second time by flight, but this time it was not from the Greeks,
but from the Romans, whom he had offended by assisting Mith-
ridates. He was now compelled to go and seek, in lands unknown
to his enemies, that safety which he could no longer find in the
Scythian forests. He then proceeded to the north of Europe, and
laid the foundations of the Teutonic nations. As fast as he sub-
dued the countries in the west and north of Europe he gave them
to one or another of his sons to govern. Thus it comes to pass that
so many sovereign families throughout Teutondom are said to be
descended from Odin. Hengist and Horsa, the chiefs of those Saxons



230 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Vile and Ye over Asgard, and he himself, with all
the gods and a great many other people, wandered

out, first westward to Gardarike (Russia), and then

south to Saxland (Germany). He had many sons, and

who conquered Britain in the fifth century, counted Odin in the
number of their ancestors. The traditions go on to tell how he
conquered Denmark, founded Odinse (Odinsve = Odin's Sanctuary;
comp. ve with the German Wei in Weinacht), and gave the kingdom
to his son Skjold (shield); how he conquered Sweden, founded the
Sigtuna temple, and gave the country to his son Yngve; how finally
Norway had to submit to him, and be ruled by a third son of Odin,
Saming.

It has been seriously contended,— and it would form an important
element in an epic based on the historical Odin,— that a desire of
being revenged on the Romans was one of the ruling principles of
Odin's whole conduct. Driven by those foes of universal liberty from
his former home in the east, his resentment was the more violent,
since the Teutons thought it a sacred duty to revenge all injuries,
especially those offered to kinsmen or country. Odin had no other
view in traversing so many distant lands, and in establishing with
so much zeal his doctrines of valor, than to arouse all Teutonic
nations, and unite them against so formidable and odious a race as
the Romans. And we, who live in the light of the nineteenth
century, and with the records before us, can read the history of the
convulsions of Europe during the decline of the Roman empire; we
can understand how that leaven, which Odin left in the bosoms of
the believers in the asa-faith, first fermented a long time in secret;
but we can also see how in the fullness of time, the signal given, the
descendants of Odin fell like a swarm of locusts upon this unhappy
empire, and, after giving it many terrible shocks, eventually over-
turned it, thus completely avenging the insult offered so many
centuries before by Pompey to their founder Odin. We can under-
stand how it became possible for

"
those vast multitudes, which the

populous north poured from her frozen loins, to pass the Rhine and
the Danube, and come like a deluge on the south, and spread be-
neath Gibraltar and the Libyan sands;" how it were possible, we
say, for them so largely to remodel and invigorate a considerable
part of Europe, nay, how they could succeed in overrunning and
overturning "the rich but rotten, the mighty but marrowless, the
disciplined but diseased, Roman empire; that gigantic and heart-
less and merciless usurpation of soulless materialism and abject
superstition of universal despotism, of systemized and relentless
plunder, and of depravity deep as hell." In connection with this
subject we would refer our readers to Mallet's Northern Antiquities,

S).
79-83, where substantially the same account is given; to Norse

ythology, pp. 232-236; to George Stephen's Runic Monuments,
Vol. 1; and to Charles Kingsley's The Roman and the Teuton.



NOTES. 231

after having subdued an extensive kingdom in Sax-

land he set his sons to defend the country. He him-
self went northward to the sea, and took up his abode

in an island which is called Odinse (see note below),
in Funen. Then he sent Gefjun across the sound

to the north to discover new countries, and she came
to King Gylfe, who gave her a ploughland. Then
she went to Jotunheim and bore four sons to a giant,
and transformed them into a yoke of oxen, and yoked
them to a plough and broke out the land into the

ocean, right opposite to Odinse, which was called

Seeland, where she afterward settled and dwelt.*

Skjold, a son of Odin, married her, and they dwelt at

Leidre.f Where the ploughed land was, is a lake or
sea called Laage.if In the Swedish land the fjords of

Laage correspond to the nesses of Seeland. Brage
the old sings thus of it:

Gefjun glad
Drew from Gylfe
The excellent land,
Denmark's increase,
So that it reeked

From the running- beasts.
Four heads and eight eyes
Bore the oxen,
As they went before the wide
Robbed land of the grassy is]e.§

lN"ow when Odin heard that things were in a pros>
perous condition in the land to the east beside Gylfe,

*
Compare this version of the myth with the one given in the first

chapter of The Fooling of Gylfe. Many explain the myth to mean
the breaking through of the Baltic between Sweden and Denmark.

fLeidre or Leire, at the end of Isefjord, in the county of Lithra-
borg, is considered the oldest royal seat in Denmark.

t Laage is a general name for lakes and rivers. It here stands
for Lake Malar, in Sweden. § The grassy isle is Seeland.



232 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

he went thither, and Gylfe made a peace with him,
for Gylfe thought he had no strength to oppose the

people of Asaland. Odin and Gylfe had many tricks
and enchantments against each other; but the Asa-

land people had always the superiority. Odin took

up his residence at the Malar lake, at the place now
called Sigtun.* There he erected a large temple,
where there were sacrifices according to the customs

of the Asaland people. He appropriated to himself
the whole of that district of country, and called it

Sigtun. To the temple gods he gave also domains.

Njord dwelt in ISToatun, Frey in Upsal, Heimdal in

Himinbjorg, Thor in Thrudvang, Balder in Breida-
blik

; t to all of them he gave good domains.
When Odin of Asaland came to the north, and the

gods with him, he began to exercise and to teach others

the arts which the people long afterward have practiced.
Odin was the cleverest of all, and from him all others
learned their magic arts ; and he knew them first, and
knew many more than other people. But now, to tell

why he is held in such high respect, we must mention
various causes that contributed to it. When sitting
among his friends his countenance was so beautiful
and friendly, that the spirits of all were exhilarated

by it; but when he was in war, he appeared fierce
and dreadful. This arose from his being able to

*
Sigtun. Sige, Ger. Sieg, (comp. Sigfrid,) means victory, and

is one of Odin's names; tun means an inclosure, and is the same
word as our modern English town. Thus Sigtun would, in modem
English, be called Odinstown; hke our Johnstown, Williamstown,
etc.

t Noatun, Thrudvang, Breidablik and Himinbjorg are purely
mythological names, and for their significance the reader is referred
to The Fooling of Gylfe. Snorre follows the lay of Grimner in the
Elder Edda.



NOTES. 233

change his color and form in any way he liked.
Another cause was, that he conversed so cleverly and

smoothly, that all who heard were persuaded. He
spoke everything in rhyme, such as is now composed,
and which we call skald-craft. He and his temple
gods were called song-smiths, for from them came
that art of song into the northern countries. Odin

could make his enemies in battle blind or deaf, or

terror-struck, and their weapons so blunt that they
could no more cut than a willow-twig; on the other

hand, his men rushed forward without armor, were as
mad as dogs or wolves, bit their shields, and were

strong as bears or wild bulls, and killed people at a

blow, and neither fire nor iron told upon them. These
were called berserks."^

Odin could transform his shape ; his body would

lie as if dead or asleep, but then he would be in the

shape of a fish, or worm, or bird, or beast, and be off

Berserk. The etymology of this word has been much con-
tested. Some, upon the authority of Snorre in the above quoted
passage, derive it from berr {bare) and serkr (comp. sark, Scotch for
shirt); but this etymology is inadmissible, because serkr is a sub-
stantive, not an adjective. Others derive it from berr (Germ. Bar =
tirsus), which is greatly to be preferred, for in olden ages athletes
and champions used to wear hides of bears, wolves and reindeer
(as skins of lions in the south), hence the names Bjalfe, Bjarnhedinn,
Ulfhedinn (hedinn, pellis),

—"
pellibus aut parvis rhenonum tegi-

mentis utuntur." Caesar, Bell. Gall. VI, 22. Even the old poets
understood the name so, as may be seen in the poem of Hornklofi
(beginning of the 10th century), a dialogue between a valkyrie and
a raven, where the valkyrie says at berserkja reiSu vil ek pik spyrja,
to which the raven replies, Ulfhednar heita, theij are called tvolf
coats. In battle the berserks were subject to fits of frenzy, called
berserksgangr {furor bersercicus), when they howled like wild
beasts, foamed at the mouth, and gnawed the iron rim of their
shields. During these fits they were, according to a popular belief,
proof against steel and fire, and made great havoc in the ranks
of the enemy. But when the fever abated they were weak and
tame. Vigfusson Cleasby's Icelandic-English Dictionary, sub voce.



234 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

in a twinkling to distant lands upon his own or other

peoples' business. With words alone he could quench
fire, still the ocean in tempest, and turn the wind to

any quarter he pleased. Odin had a ship, which he
called Skidbladner,

"'^ in which he sailed over wide

seas, and which he could roll up like a cloth. Odin
carried with him Mimer's head, which told him all
the news of other countries. Sometimes even he
called the dead out of the earth, or set himself beside

the burial-mounds
;
whence he was called the ghost-

sovereign, and the lord of the mounds. He had two
ravens, f to whom he had taught the speech of man;
and they flew far and wide through the land, and

brought him the news. In all such things he was

preeminently wise. He taught all these arts in runes
and songs, which are called incantations, and there-
fore the Asaland people are called incantation-smiths.

Odin also understood the art in which the greatest
power is lodged, and which he himself jDracticed,
namely, what is called magic. By means of this he
could know beforehand the predestined fate :j: of men,
or their not yet completed lot, and also bring on the

death, ill-luck or bad health of people, or take away
the strength or wit from one person and give it to

another. But after such witchcraft followed such

* In the mythology this ship belongs to Frey, having been made
for him by the dwarfs.

fHugin and Munin.
i The old Norse word is orlog, which is plural, (from or = Ger. ur,

and log, latcs,) and means the primal law, fate, weird, doom; the
Greek /lolpa. The idea of predestination was a salient feature in the
Odinic religion. The word orlog, 0. H. G. tirlac, M. H. G. itrlone,
Dutch orlog, had special reference to a man's fate in war. Hence

OrlogschifPe in German means a naval fleet. The Danish orlog
means warfare at sea.



NOTES. 235

weakness and anxiety, that it was not tlioiiglit re-

spectable for men to practice it; and therefore the

priestesses were brought up in this art. Odin knew

definitely where all missing cattle were concealed

under the earth, and understood the songs by which

the earth, the hills, the stones and mounds were

opened to him; and he bound those who dwell in

them by the power of his word, and went in and took

what he pleased. From these arts he became very
celebrated. His enemies dreaded him ; his friends

put their trust in him, and relied on his power and on

himself. He taught the most of his arts to his priests
of the sacrifices, and they came nearest to himself in

all wisdom and witch-knowledge. Many others, how-

ever, occupied themselves much with it; and from

that time witchcraft spread far and wide, and con-

tinued long. People sacrificed to Odin, and the

twelve chiefs of Asaland,
— called them their gods,

and believed in them long after. From Odin's name
came the name Audun, which people gave to his sons ;
and from Thor's name came Thorer, also Thorarinn ;
and it was also sometimes augmented by other additions,
as Steinthor, Hafthor, and many kinds of alterations.

Odin established the same law in his land that had

been before in Asaland. Thus he established by law

that all dead men should be burned, and their prop-
erty laid with them upon the pile, and the ashes be

cast into the sea or buried in the earth. Thus, said

he, everyone will come to Yalhal with the riches he

had with him upon the pile ; and he would also enjoy
whatever he himself had buried in the earth. For

men of consequence a mound should be raised to their

memory, and for all other warriors who had been



236 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

distinguished for manhood, a standing stone ; which

custom remained long after Odin's time. Toward
winter there should be a blood-sacrifice for a good

year, and in the middle of winter for a good crop;
and the third sacrifice should be in summer, for vic-

tory in battle. Over all Svithjod"^ the people paid
Odin a scatt, or tax,— so much on each head ; but he
had to defend the country from enemy or disturbance,
and pay the expense of the sacrifice-feasts toward

winter for a good year.

Njord took a wife higlit Skade ; but she would not

live with him, but married afterward Odin, and had

many sons by him, of whom one was called Saming,
and of this Eyvind Skaldespiller sings thus :

To Asasonf Queen Skade bore

Saming, who dyed his shield in gore,
—

The giant queen of rock and snow

Who loves to dwell on earth below,
The iron pine-tree's daughter she,

Sprung from the rocks that rib the sea,
To Odin bore full many a son,—
Heroes of many a battle won.

To Saming Jarl Hakon the Great reckoned up his

pedigree.:}: This Svithjod (Sweden) they call Mann-

heim, but the great Svithjod they call Godheim, and

of Godheim great wonders and novelties were related.

Odin died in his bed in Sweden ; and when he was

near his death he made himself be marked with the

point of a spear, § and said he was going to Godheim,

*
Svithjod, which here means Sweden, is derived from Odin^s

name, Svidr and thjod = folk, people. Svithjod thus means Odin's
people, and the country takes its name from the people.

t Odin. X Norway was given to Saming by Odin.
§ He gave himself nine wounds in the form of the head of a spear,

or Thor's hammer; that is, he marked himself with the sign of the
cross

^
an ancient heathen custom.



NOTES. 237

and would give a welcome there to all his friends,
and all brave warriors should be dedicated to him

;

and the Swedes believed that he was gone to the
ancient Asgard, and would live there eternally. Then

began the belief in Odin, and the calling upon him.
The Swedes believed that he often showed himself
to them before any great battle. To some he gave
victory, others he invited to himself; and they
reckoned both of these to be well off in their fate.

Odin was burnt, and at his pile there was great
splendor. It was their faith that the higher the
smoke arose in the air, the higher would he be raised
whose pile it was ; and the richer he would be the
more property that was consumed with him.

Njord of Noatun was then the sole sovereign of
the Swedes

;
and he continued the sacrifices, and was

called the drot, or sovereign, by the Swedes, and he
received scatt and gifts from them. In his days were

peace and plenty, and such good years in all respects
that the Swedes believed Njord ruled over the growth
of seasons and the prosperity of the people. In his
time all the diars, or gods, died, and blood-sacrifices
were made for them. Njord died on a bed of sick-

ness, and before he died made himself be marked for
Odin with the spear-point. The Swedes burned him,
and all wept over his grave-mound.

Frey took the kingdom after Njord, and was called
drot by the Swedes, and they paid taxes to him. He
was like his father, fortunate in friends and in good
seasons. Frey built a great temple at Upsala, made
it his chief seat, and gave it all his taxes, his land and

goods. Then began the Upsala domains, which have
remained ever since. Then began in his day the



238 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Frode-peace ; and then there were good seasons in

all the land, which the Swedes ascribed to Frey, so

that he was more worshiped than the other gods,
as the people became much richer in his days by
reason of the peace and good seasons. His wife was

called Gerd, daughter of Gymer, and their son was

called Fjolner. Frey was called by another name,

Yngve ; and this name Yngve was considered long
after in his race as a name of honor, so that his de-
scendants have since been called Ynglings (^. e. Yngve-

lings). Frey fell into a sickness, and as his illness

took the upper hand, his men took the plan of letting
few approach him. In the meantime they raised a

great mound, in which they placed a door with three

holes in it. Now when Frey died they bore him

secretly into the mound, but told the Swedes he was

alive, and they kept watch over him for three years.

They brought all the taxes into the mound, and

through the one hole they put in the gold, through
the other the silver, and through the third the copper

money that was paid. Peace and good seasons con-

tinued.

Freyja alone remained of the gods, and she became

on this account so celebrated that all women of dis-
tinction were called by her name, whence they now
have the title Frue (Germ. Frau\ so that every wo-
man is called frue (that is, mistress) over her prop-
erty, and the wife is called the house-frue. Freyja
continued the blood-sacrifices. Freyja had also many
other names. Her husband was called Oder, and her

daughters Hnos and Gersame. They were so very
beautiful that afterward the most precious jewels were

called by their names.



NOTES. 239

When it became known to the Swedes that Frey
was dead, and yet peace and good seasons continued,

they believed that it must be so as long as Frey re-

mained in Sweden, and therefore they would not burn

his remains, but called him the god of this world, and

afterward offered continually blood-sacrifices to him,

principally for peace and good seasons."^"

FORNJOT AND THE SETTLEMENT OF NORWAY.

In the asa-faith we find various foreign elements
introduced. Thus, for example, the vans did not

originally belong to the Odinic system. As the
Teutons came in contact with other races, the re-

ligious ideas of the latter were frequently adopted
in some modified form. Especially do Finnish

elements enter into the asa-system. The Finnish

god of thunder was Ukko. He is supposed to have
been confounded with our Thor, whence the latter

got the name Oku-Thor (Ukko-Thor). The vans

may be connected with the Finnish Wainamoinen,
and in the same manner a number of Celtic elements
have been mixed with Teutonic mythology. And this
is not all. There must have flourished a religious

system in the North before the arrival of Odin and

* Here ends Snorre's account of the asas in Heimskringla. The
reader will, of course, compare the account here given of Odin,
Njord, Frey, Freyja, etc., with the purely mythological description
of them m the Younger Edda, and with that in Norse Mythology.
Upon the whole, Snorre has striven to accommodate his sketch to
the Eddas, while he has had to clothe mythical beings with the
characteristics of human kings. Like Saxo-Grammaticus, Snorre has
striven to show that the deities, which we now recognize as personified
forces and phenomena of nature, were extraordinary and enterprising
persons, who formerly ruled in the North, and inaugurated the
customs, government and religion of Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Germany, England, and the other Teutonic lands.



240 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

his apostles. This was probably either Tshudic or

Celtic, or a mixture of the two. The asa-doctrine

superseded it, but there still remain traces in some
of the oldest records of the North. Thus we have in
the prehistoric sagas of Iceland an account of the

finding of Norway, wherein it is related that Fornjot,*
in Jotland, which is also called Finland or Quenland,
east of the Gulf of Bothnia, had three sons: Hler.

also called ^ger, Loge and Kare.f Of Loge it is
related that he was of giant descent, and, being very
tall of stature, he was called Haloge, that is, High
Loge ; and after him the northern part of Norway is
called Halogaland (now Helgeland). He was married
to Glod (a red-hot coal), and had with her two daugh-

ters, Eysa and Eimyrja ; both words meaning glowing
embers. Haloge had two jarls, Yifil (the one taking
a vif= wife) and Yesete (the one who sits at the
ve — the sanctuary, that is, the dweller by the hearth,
the first sanctuary), who courted his daughters ; the
former addressing himself to Eimyrja, the latter to

Eysa, but the king refusing to give his consent, they
carried them away secretly. Vesete settled in Bor-

gundarholm (Bornholm), and had a son, Bue (one who
settles on a farm) ; Yifil sailed further east and settled

on the island Yifilsey, on the coast of Sweden, and

had a son, Yiking (the pirate).
The third son, Kare, had a numerous offspring. He

had one son by name Jokul (iceberg), another Froste

* The word fornjot can be explained in two ways: either as for-

S'ot

= the first enjoyer, possessor; or as fom-jot, the ancient giant,
e would then correspond to Ymer.
t Notice this trinity: Hler is the sea (comp. the Welsh word

llyr
=

sea); Loge is fire (comp. the Welsh llwg'), he reminds us both
by his name and his nature of Loke; Kare is the wind.



NOTES. 241

(frost), and Froste's son was named Sna (snow). He
had a third son, by name Thorri (bare frost), after
whom the mid-winter month, Thorra-month, was called;
and his daughters hight Fonn (packed snow), Drifa

(snow-drift), and Mjoll (meal, fine snow). All these

correspond well to Kare's name, which, as stated,
means wind. Thorri had two sons, Nor and Gor, and
a daughter, Goe. The story goes on to tell how Goe,
the sister, was lost, and how the brothers went to
search for her, until they finally found him who had
robbed her. He was Hrolf, from the mountain, a son
of the giant Svade, and a grandson of Asa-Thor. They
settled their trouble, and thereupon Hrolf married

Goe, and ]^or married Hrolf 's sister, settled in the

land and called it after his own name, Norvegr, that

is, Norway. By this story we are reminded of Kad-
mos, who went to seek his lost sister Europa. In the

Younger Edda the winds are called the sons of Forn-

jot, the sea is called the son of Fornjot, and the
brother of the fire and of the winds, and Fornjot is
named among the old giants. This makes it clear
that Fornjot and his offspring are not historical per-
sons, but cosmological impersonations. And addi-
tional proof of this is found by an examination of the

beginning of the Saga of Thorstein, Yiking's Son.

(See Viking Tales of the North, pp. 1 and 2).



THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.

CHAPTER I.

This story about the ploughing of Gylfe reminds

us of the legend told in the lirst book of Yirgil's
^neid, about the founding of Carthage by Dido, who

bought from the Libyan king as much ground as she
could cover with a bull's hide. Elsewhere it is re-

lated that she cut the bull's hide into narrow strips
and encircled therewith all the ground upon which

Carthage was afterward built. Thus Dido deceived
the Libyan king nearly as effectually as Gefjun de-
luded King Gylfe. The story is also told by Snorre
in Heimskringla, see p. 231.

The passage in verse, which has given translators
so much trouble in a transposed form, would read
as follows : Gef jun glad drew that excellent land

(djuprodul = the deep sun = gold ; dt5la = udal =
property; djuprodul otJla = the golden property),
Denmark's increase (Seeland), so that it reeked

(steamed) from the running oxen. The oxen bore
four heads and eight eyes, as they went before the

wide piece of robbed land of the isle so rich in grass.

Gefjun is usually interpreted as a goddess of agri-

culture, and her name is by some derived from y^ and

fjon^ that is, tei't'ce separatio / others compare it with

the Anglo-Saxon geofon = the sea. The etymology
remains very uncertain.



NOTES. 243

CHAPTER II.

It is to the delusion or eye-deceit mentioned in this

chapter that Snorre Sturlasson refers in his Heims-

kringla, in Chapter YI of Ynglingla Saga.
Thjodolf of Hvin was a celebrated skald at the

court of Harald Fairhair.

Thinking thatchers, etc. Literally transposed, this

passage would read: Reflecting men let shields (lit-
erally Svafner's, that is Odin's roof-trees,) glisten on

the back. They were smitten with stones. To let
shields glisten on the back, is said of men who throw
their shields on their backs to protect themselves

against those who pursue the flying host.
Har means the High One, Jafnhar the Equally

High One, and Thride the Third One. By these three

may be meant the three chief gods of the North :
Odin, Thor and Frey ; or they may be simply an ex-

pression of the Eddie trinity. This trinity is repre-
sented in a number of ways : by Odin, Yile and Ye
in the creation of the world, and by Odin, Hoener
and Loder in the creation of Ask and Embla, the
first human pair. The number three figures exten-

sively in all mythological systems. In the pre-chaotic
state we have Muspelheim, JSTiflheim and Ginungagap.
Fornjot had three sons : Hler, Loge and Kare. There
are three norns : Urd, Yerdande and Skuld. There are
three fountains: Hvergelmer, Urd's and Mimer's;
etc. (See ISTorse Mythology, pp. 183, 195, 196.)

Har being Odin, Har's Hall will be Yalhal. You
will not come out from this hall unless you are wiser.
In the lay of Yafthrudner, of the Elder Edda, we



244 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

have a similar challenge, where Yafthrudner says to

Odin:
Out will you not come

From our halls
Unless I find you to be wiser (than I am).

CHAPTER III.

This chapter gives twelve names of Odin. In the

Eddas and in the skaldic lays he has in all nearly two

hundred names. His most common name is Odin

(in Anglo-Saxon and in Old High German Wodan),
and this is thought by many to be of the same origin
as our word god. The other Old Norse word for

god, tivi^ is identical
in root with Lat. divus ; Sansk.

dwas; Gr. Jtog (Zetx;); and this is again connected

with Tf//\ the Tivisco in the Germania of Tacitus.

(See Max Miiller's Lectures on the Science of Lan-

guage, 2d series, p. 425). Paulus Diakonus states that

Wodan, or Gwodan, was worshiped by all branches

of the Teutons. Odin has also been sought and found

in the Scythian Zdlmoxis^ in the Indian Buddha, in

the Celtic Budd, and in the Mexican Yotan. Zal-

moxis, derived from the Gr. ZaXiiSq^ helmet, reminds

us of Odin as the helmet-bearer (Grimm, Gesch. der

Deutschen Sprache). According to Humboldt, a race

in Guatemala, Mexico, claim to be descended from

Votan (Yues des Cordilleres, 1817, I, 208). This sug-

gests the question whether Odin's name may not have
been brought to America by the Norse discoverers

in the 10th and 11th centuries, and adopted by some

of the native races. In the Lay of Grimner (Elder

Edda) the following names of Odin are enumerated :



NOTES. 245

Grim is my name
And Ganglere,
Herjan and Helmet-bearer,
Thekk and Thride,
Thud and Ud,
Helblinde and Har,

Sad and Svipal,
And Sanngetal,
Herteit and Hnikar,

Bileyg and Baleyg,
Bolverk, Fjolner,

Grim and Grimner,

Glapsvid and Fjolsvid,

Sidhot, Sidskeg,

Sigfather, Hnikud,

Alfather, Valfather,

Atrid and Farmatyr.
With one name
Was I never named
When 1 fared 'mong the peoples.

Grimner they called me
Here at Geirrod's,
But Jalk at Asmund's,
And Kjalar the time
When sleds (kjalka) I drew,
And Thror at the Thing,
Vidur on the battle-field,
Oske and Ome,
Jafnhar and Biflinde,
Gondler and Harbard 'mong the gods.

Svidur and Svidre

Hight I at Sokmimer's,
And fooled the ancient giant
When 1 alone Midvitne's,
The mighty son's.
Bane had become.



246 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Odin 1 now am called,
Ygg was my name before,
Before that 1 hight Thuiid,
Vak and Skilfing,

'

Vafud and Hroptatyr,
Got and Jalk 'mong the gods,
Ofner and Svafner.

All these names, 1 trow,
Have to me alone been given.

What the etymology of all these names is, it is not

easy to tell. The most of them are clearly Norse

words, and express the various activities of their

owner. It is worthy of notice that it is added when
and where Odin bore this or that name (his name was
Grim at Geirrod's, Jalk at Asmund's, etc.), and that
the words sometimes indicate a progressive develop-
ment, as Thund, then Ygg, and then Odin. First he
was a mere sound in the air (Thund), then he took
to thinking (Ygg), and at last he became the inspiring
soul of the universe. Although we are unable to
define all these names, they certainly each have a

distinct meaning, and our ancestors certainly under-

stood them perfectly. Har = the High One ; Jafn-
har = the Equally High One ; Thride = the Third
{Zebq aXXoc; and Tpiroq) ; Alfather probably contracted

from Aldai2ii\\Qv = the Father of the Ages and the
Creations

; Yeratyr = the Lord of Beings ; liogner =
the Ruler (from regin) ; Got (Gautr, from gjota, to

cast)
=;: the Creator, Lat. Instillator ; Mjotud = the

Creator, the word being allied to Anglo-Saxon meotod,
metod^ Germ. Messer^ and means originally cutter ;
but to cut and to make are synonymous. Such names
as these have reference to Odin's divinity as creator,

arranger and ruler of gods and men. Svid and Fjol-



NOTES. 247

svid == the swift, the wise ; Ganglere, Gangrad and

Yegtam = the wanderer, the waywont ; Vidrer =
the weather-ruler, together with serpent-names like

Ofner, Svafner, etc., refer to Odin's knowledge, his

journeys, the various shapes he assumes. Permeating
all nature, he appears in all its forms. Names like

Sidhot — the slouchy hat ; Sidskeg = the long-beard ;
Baleyg = the burning-eye ; Grimner = the masked ;
Jalk (Jack) = the youth, etc. , express the various
forms in which he was thought to appear,

— to his
slouchy hat, his long beard, or his age, etc. Such

names as Sanngetal = the true investigator ; Farma-

tyr
= the cargo-god, etc., refer to his various occu-

pations as inventor, discoverer of runes, protector of

trade and commerce, etc. Finally, all such names

as Herfather — father of hosts ; Herjan = the devas-
tator

; Sigfather
= the father of victory ; Sigtyr =

god of victory ; Skilfing = producing trembling ; Hni-
kar = the breaker, etc., represent Odin as the god
of war and victory. Oske = wish, is thus called be-
cause he gratifies our desires. Gimle, as will be seen

later, is the abode of the blessed after Ragnarok.

Vingolf (Yin and golf) means friends' jioor^ and is

the hall of the goddesses. Hel is the goddess of

death, and from her name our word hell is derived.
Our ancestors divided the universe into nine worlds:

the uppermost was Muspelheim (the world of light) ;
the lowest was Niflheim (the world of darkness). Com-

pare the Greek word v&tpily = Triist. (See Norse Myth-
ology, p. 187.)

GiNUNGAGAP. Ginn means wide, large, far-reaching,

perhaps also void (compare the Anglo-Saxon gin
—

gaping, open, spacious ; ginian = to gap ; and gin-



248 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

nung = a yawning). Ginungagap thus means the
yawning gap or abyss, and represents empty space.
The poets use ginnung in the sense of a fish and of
a hawk, and in geographical saga-fragments it is used

as the name of the Polar Sea.
HvERGELMER. Tliis word is usually explained as a

transposition for Hvergemler, which would then be

derived from Hver and gamall (old) = the old kettle ;
but Petersen shows that gelmir must be taken from

galm, which is still found in the Jutland dialect, and

means a gale (compare Golmstead = a windy place,
and golme = to roar, blow). Gelmer is then the one
producing galm, and Hvergelmer thus means the

roaring kettle. The twelve rivers proceeding from

Hvergelmer are called the Elivogs (filivagar) in the
next chapter. £li-vagar means, according to Vigfus-

son, ice-waves. The most of the names occur in the

long list of river names given in the Lay of Grimner,
of the Elder Edda. Svol — the cool

;
Gunnthro = the

battle-trough. Slid is also mentioned in the Vala's

Prophecy, where it is represented as being full of mud
and swords. Sylg (from svelgja = to swallow) = the
devourer

; Ylg (from yla = to roar) = the roaring
one

; Leipt = the glowing, is also mentioned in the
Lay of Helge Hunding's Bane, where it is stated that

they swore by it (compare Styx) ; Gjoll (from gjalla —
to glisten and clang) = the shining, clanging one.
The meaning of the other words is not clear, but

they doubtless all, like those explained, express cold,

violent motion, etc. The most noteworthy of these

rivers are Leipt and Gjoll. In the Lay of Grimner

they are said to flow nearest to the abode of man,
and fall thence into HePs realm. Over Gjoll was



NOTES. 249

the bridge which Hermod, after the death of Balder,
crossed on his way to Hel. It is said to be thatched
with shining gold, and a maid by name Modgud
watches it. In the song of Sturle Thordson, on the

death of Skule Jarl, it is said that "the king's kins-

man went over the GjoU-bridge." The farther part
of the horizon, which often appears like a broad

bright stream, may have suggested this river.
SuRT means the swarthy or black one. Many have

regarded him as the unknown (dark) god, but this
is probably an error. But there was some one in

Muspelheim who sent the heat, and gave life to the
frozen drops of rime. The latter, and not Surt, who
is a giant, is the eternal god, the mighty one, whom
the skald in the Lay of Hyndla dare not name. It is

interesting to notice that our ancestors divided the

evolution of the world into three distinct periods :

(1) a pre-chaotic condition (Niflheim, Muspelheim
and Ginungagap) ; (2) a chaotic condition (Ymer and
the cow Audhumbla) ; (3) and finally the three gods,
Odin (spirit), Yile (will) and Ve (sanctity), trans-
formed chaos into cosmos. And away back in this

pre-chaotic state of the world we lind this mighty
being who sends the heat. It is not definitely stated,
but it can be inferred from other passages, that just
as the good principle existed from everlasting in

Muspelheim, so the evil principle existed co-eternally
with it in Hvergelmer in Niflheim. Hvergelmer is

the source out of which all matter first proceeded, and

the dragon or devil ISTidhug, who dwells in Hvergel-
mer, is, in our opinion, the evil principle who is from

eternity. The good principle shall continue forever,
but the evil shall cease to exist after Kagnarok.



250 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Ymer is the noisy one, and his name is derived
from ywja — to howl (compare also the Finnish deity
Jumo, after whom the town Umea takes its name, like
Odinse).

AuRGELMER, Thrudgelmer and Bergelmer express
the gradual development from aur (clay) to thrud

(that which is compressed), and finally to berg (rock).
YiDOLF, YiLMEiDE and SvARTHOFDE are mentioned

nowhere else in the mythology.
BuRE and Bor mean the bearing and the born ;

that is, father and son.

BoLTHORN means the miserable one, from bol =
evil

;
and Bestla may mean that which is best. The

idea then is that Bor united himself with that which
was best of the miserable material at hand.

That the flood caused by the slaying of Ymer re-
minds us of Noah and his ark, and of the Greek
flood, needs only to be suggested.

CHAPTER IV.

Ask means an ash-tree, and Embla an elm-tree.
While the etymology of the names in the myths

are very obscure, the myths themselves are clear

enough. Similar myths abound in Greek mythology.
The story about Bil and Hjuke is our old English
rhyme about Jack and Gill, who went up the hill to
fetch a pail of water.

CHAPTER V.

In reference to the golden age, see Norse Myth-

ology, pp. 182 and 197.

In the appendix to the German so-called Hero-
Book we are told that the dwarfs were first created



NOTES, 251

to cultivate the desert lands and the mountains ;

thereupon the giants, to subdue the wild beasts ; and

finally the heroes, to assist the dwarfs against the

treacherous giants. While the giants are always
hostile to the gods, the dwarfs are usually friendly

to them.

Dwarfs. Both giants and dwarfs shun the light.
If surprised by the breaking forth of day, they be-

come changed to stone. In one of the poems of the

Elder Edda (the Alvismal), Thor amuses the dwarf

Alvis with various questions till daylight, and then

cooly says to him : With great artifices, I tell you,

you have been deceived ; you are surprised here,

dwarf, by daylight ! The sun now shines in the hall.
In the Helgakvida Atle says to the giantess Hrim-

gerd : It is now day, Ilrimgerd ! But Atle has de-
tained you, to your life's perdition. It will appear
a laughable harbor-mark, where you stand as a stone-

image.
In the German tales the dwarfs are described as

deformed and diminutive, coarsely clad and of dusky
hue : ' ' a little black man,

" ' ' a little gray man.
' '

They
are sometimes of the height of a child of four years,
sometimes as two spans high, a thumb high (hence,
Tom Thumb). The old Danish ballad of Eline of
Yillenwood mentions a troll not bigger than an ant.

Dvergmal (the speech of the dwarfs) is the Old IS'orse

expression for the echo in the mountains.

In the later popular belief, the dwarfs are generally
called the subterraneans, the brown men in the moor,
etc. They make themselves invisible by a hat or
hood. The women spin and weave, the men are smiths.
In Norway rock-crystal is called dwarf-stone. Certain



252 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

stones are in Denmark called dwarf-liammers. They
borrow tilings and seek advice from peo])le, and beg
aid for their wives when in labor, all which services

they reward. But they also lame cattle, are thievish,
and will carry off damsels. There have been instances

of dwarf females having married and had children with

men. (Thorpe's Northern Mythology.)
War. It was the first warfare in the world, says

the Elder Edda, when they pierced Gullveig (gold-
thirst) through with a spear, and burned her in Odin's

hall. Thrice they burned her, thrice she was born

anew : again and again, but still she lives. When
she comes to a house they call her Heide (the briglit,
the welcome), and regard her as a propitious vala

or prophetess. She can tame wolves, understands

witchcraft, and delights wicked women. Hereupon
the gods consulted together whether they should

punish this misdeed, or accept a blood -fine, when
Odin cast forth a spear among mankind, and now

began war and slaughter in the world. The defenses

of the burgh of the asas was broken down. The vans

anticipated war, and hastened over the field. The

Valkyries came from afar, ready to ride to the gods'

people: Skuld with the shield, Skogul, Gunn, Hild,
Gondul and Geirr Skogul. (Quoted by Thorpe.)

CHAPTER VT.

In reference to Ygdrasil, we refer our readers to

Norse Mythology, pp. 205-211, and to Thomas Car-

lyle's Heroes and Hero-worship.
A connection between the norns IJrd, Yerdande and

Skuld and the weird sisters in Shakspeare's Macbeth

has long since been recognized ; but new light has



NOTES. 253

recently been thrown upon the subject by the philoso-

pher Karl Blind, who has contributed valuable articles
on the subject in the German periodical ''Die Gegen-
wart ' ' and in the ' ' London Academy.

' ' We take the
liberty of reproducing here an abstract of his article

in the ''Academy":******
The fact itself of these Witches being simply transfigurations, or

later disguises, of the Teutonic Norns is fully established
— as may

be seen from Grimm or Simrock. In delineating these hags, Shak-

speare has practically drawn upon old Germanic sources, perhaps
upon current folk-lore of his time.

It has always struck me as noteworthy that in the greater part
of the scene between the Weird Sisters, Macbeth and Banquo, and
wherever the Witches come in, Shakspeare uses the staff-rime in a
remarkable manner. Not only does this add powerfully to the
archaic impressiveness and awe, but it also seems to bring the form

and figure of the Sisters of Fate more closely within the circle of the
Teutonic idea. I have pointed out this striking use of the alliterative

system in Macbeth in an article on "An old German Poem and a
Vedic Hymn," which appeared in Fraser in June, 1877, and in
which the derivation of the Weird Sisters from the Germanic Norns
is mentioned.

The very first scene in the first act of Macbeth opens strongly with
the staff-rime:

1st Witch. When shall we three meet again—
In thunder, lightning or in rain?

2d Witch. When the hurly-burly's done.
When the battle's lost and won. \

Sd Witch. That will be ere set of sun.

1st Witch. Where the place?
2d Witch. Upon the heath.
Sd Witch. There to meet with Macbeth.
1st Witch. I come, Graymalkin 1

All. Paddock calls. Anon.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair.

Hover through the fog and filthy air.

Not less marked is the adoption of the fullest staff-rime— to-
gether (as above) with the end-rime

— in the third scene, when the
Weird Sisters speak. Again, there is the staff-rime when Banquo
addresses them. Again, the strongest alliteration, combined with the



254 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

end-rime, runs aH through the Witches' spell-song in Act iv, scene 1.
This feature in Shakspeare appears to me to merit closer investiga-
tion; all the more so because a less regular alliteration, but still a
marked one, is found in not a few passages of a number of his plays.
Only one further instance of the systematic employment of allitera-
tion may here be noted in passing. It is in Ariel's songs in the
Tempest, Act i, scene 2. Schlegel and Tieck evidently did not ob-
serve this alliterative peculiarity. Their otherwise excellent transla-
tion does not render it, except so far as the obvious similarity of

certain English and German words involuntarily made them do so.
But in the notes to their version of Macbeth the character of the
Weird Sisters is also misunderstood, though Warburton is referred

to, who had already suggested their derivations from the Valkyrs or
Norns.

It is an error to say that the Witches in Macbeth "are never
called witches" (compare Act i, scene 3: "'Give me!' quoth I.
'A-roint thee, witch!

'

the rump-fed ronyon cries "). However, their

designation as Weird Sisters fully settles the case of their Germanic

origin.

This name "Weird" is derived from the Anglo-Saxon Norn
Wyrd (Sax. Wurth; 0. H. Ger. Wurd; Norse, Urd), who repre-
sents the Past, as her very name shows. Wurd is die Geivordene—
the "Has Been," or rather the "Has Become," if one could say
so in English.******

In Shakspeare the Witches are three in number— even as in
Norse, German, as well as in Keltic and other mythologies. Urd,
properly speaking, is the Past. Skuld is the Future, or "That
Which shall Be." Verdandi, usually translated as the Present, has
an even deeper meaning. Her name is not to be derived from vera
(to be), but from verda (Ger. iverden). This verb, which has a mixed

meaning of
"
to be," "to become," or to

"
grow," has been lost in

English. Verdandi is, therefore, not merely a representative of pres-
ent Being, but of the process of Growing, or of Evolution

—which
gives her figure a profounder aspect. Indeed, there is generally more

significance in mythological tales than those imagine who look upon
them chiefly as a barren play of fancy.

Incidentally it may be remarked that, though Shakspeare 's Weird
Sisters are three in number— corresponding to Urd, Verdandi and
Skuld— German and Northern mythology and folk-lore occasionally
speak of twelve or seven of them. In the German tale of Dorn-



NOTES. 255

roschen, or the Sleeping Beauty, there are twelve good fays; and a

thu'teenth, who works the evil spell. Once, in German folk-lore, we
meet with but two Sisters of Fate— one of them called Kann^ the
other Muss. Perhaps these are representatives of man's measure of

free will (that which he
"
can ''), and of that which is his inevitable

fate— or, that which he " must " do.
Though the word "Norn" has been lost in England and Ger-

many, it is possibly preserved in a German folk-lore ditty, which

speaks of three Sisters of Fate as "Nuns." Altogether, German
folk-lore is still full of rimes about three Weird Sisters. They are
sometimes called Wild Women, or Wise Women, or the Measurers

{Metten)
—

namely, of Fate; or, euphemistically, like the Eumeni-

des, the Advisers of Welfare {Heil-Rdthinnen), reminding us of the

counsels given to Macbeth in the apparition scene; or the Quick
Judges {Gach-Schepfen). Even as in the Edda, these German fays
weave and twist threads or ropes, and attach them to distant parts,
thus fixing the weft of Fate. One of these fays is sometimes called

Held, and described as black, or as half dark half white— like Hel,
the Mistress of the Nether World. That German fay is also called

Rachel, clearly a contraction of Rach-Hel, i. e. the Avengeress Hel.

Now, in Macbeth also the Weird Sisters are described as "black."
The coming up of Hekate with them in the cave-scene might not

unfitly be looked upon as a parallel with the German Held, or Rach-

Hel, and the Norse Hel; these Teutonic deities being originally
Goddesses of Nocturnal Darkness, and of the Nether World, even
as Hekate.

In German folk-lore, three Sisters of Fate bear the names of

Wilbet, Worbet and Ainbet. Etymologically these names seem to
refer to the well-disposed nature of a fay representing the Past; to

the warring or worrying troubles of the Present; and to the terrors

[Ain = Agin) of the Future. All over southern Germany, from
Austria to Alsace and Rhenish Hesse, the three fays are known
under various names besides Wilbet, Worbet, and Ainbet— for in-
stance, as Mechtild, Ottilia, and Gertraud; as Irmina, Adela, and

Chlothildis, and so forth. The fay in the middle of this trio is

always a good fay, a white fay
—but blind. Her treasure (the very

names of Ottilia and Adela point to a treasure) is continually being
taken from her by the third fay, a dark and evil one, as well as by
the first. This myth has been interpreted as meaning that the

Present, being blinded as to its own existence, is continually being
encroached upon, robbed as it were, by the dark Future and the Past.



256 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

Of this particular trait there is no vestige in Shakspeare's Weird
Sisters. They, hke the Norns, "go hand in hand." But there is
another point which claims attention: Shakspeare's Witches are

bearded. ("You should be women, and yet your beards forbid me
to interpret that you are so." Act i, scene 3.)

It need scarcely be brought to recollection that a commingling of

the female and male character occurs in the divine and semi-divine

figures of various mythological systems
—

including the Bearded

Venus. Of decisive importance is, however, the fact of a bearded

Weird Sister having apparently been believed m by our heathen
German forefathers.

Near Wessobrunn, m Upper Bavana, where the semi-heathen
fragment of a cosmogonic lay, known as "Wessobrunn Prayer,"
was discovered, there has also been found, of late, a rudely-sculp-
tured three-headed image. It is looked upon as an ancient effigy of

the German Norns. The Cloister of the three Holy Bournes, or

Fountains, which stands close by the place of discovery, is supposed
to have been set up on ground that had once served for pagan

worship. Probably the later monkish estabhshment of the Three

Holy Bournes had taken the place of a similarly named heathen

sanctuary where the three Sisters of Fate were once adored. In-

deed, the name of all the corresponding fays in yet current German
folk-lore is connected with holy wells. This quite fits in with the

three Eddie Bournes near the great Tree of Existence, at one of

which—apparently at the oldest, which is the very Source of Being—the Norns live, " the maidens that over the Sea of Age travel in
deep foreknowledge," and of whom it is said that:

They laid the lots; they ruled the life

To the sons of men, their fate foretelling.

Now, curiously enough, the central head of the slab found near

Wessobrunn, in the neighborhood of the Cloister of the Three Holy

Bournes, is bearded. This has puzzled our archaeologists. Some of

them fancied that what appears to be a beard might after all be the

hair of one of the fays or Norns, tied round the chm. By the Hght
of the description of the Weird Sisters in Shakspeare's Macbeth we,

however, see at once the true connection.

In every respect, therefore, his
" Witches

"
are an echo from the

ancient Germanic creed— an echo, moreover, coming to us in the
oldest Teutonic verse-form; that is, in the staff-rime.

Karl Blind.



NOTES. 257

Elves. The elves of later times seem a sort of
middle thing between the light and dark elves. They
are fair and lively, but also bad and mischievous.
In some parts of Norway the peasants describe them
as diminutive naked boys with hats on. Traces of
their dance are sometimes to be seen on the wet grass,

especially on the banks of rivers. Their exhalation

is injurious, and is called alfgust or elfhlcest^ causing
a swelling, which is easily contracted by too nearly
approaching places where they have spat, etc. They
have a predilection for certain spots, but particularly
for large trees, which on that account the owners do

not venture to meddle with, but look on them as

something sacred, on which the weal or woe of the

place depends. Certain diseases among their cattle
are attributed to the elves, and are, therefore, called

elf-fire or elf-shot. The dark elves are often con-
founded with the dwarfs, with whom they, indeed,
seem identical, although they are distinguished in

Odin's Raven's Song. The E'orwegians also make
a distinction between dwarfs and elves, believing the

former to live solitary and in quiet, while the latter

love music and dancing. (Faye, p. 48; quoted by
Thorpe.)

The fairies of Scotland are precisely identical with
the above. They are described as a diminutive race
of beings of a mixed or rather dubious nature, capri-
cious in their dispositions and mischievous in their

resentment. They inhabit the interior of green hills,

chiefly those of a conical form, in Gaelic termed

Sighan^ on which they lead their dances by moon-

light ; impressing upon the surface the marks of

circles, which sometimes appear yellow and blasted,



258 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

sometimes of a deep green hue, and within which it

is dangerous to sleep, or to be found after sunset.

Cattle which are suddenly seized with the cramp, or

some similar disorder, are said to be elf-shot. (Scott's

Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border ; quoted by Thorpe. )
Of the Swedish elves, Arndt gives the following

sketch : Of giants, of dwarfs, of the alp, of dragons,
that keep watch over treasures, they have the usual

stories
;

nor are the kmdly elves forgotten. How
often has my postillion, when he observed a circular
mark in the dewy grass, exclaimed : See ! there the
elves have been dancing. These elf-dances play a

great part in the spinning-room. To those who at

midnight happen to enter one of these circles, the

elves become visible, and may then play all kinds
of pranks with them ; though in general they are

little, merry, harmless beings, both male and female.

They often sit in small stones, that are hollowed out
in circular form, and which are called elf-querns or

mill-stones. Their voice is said to be soft like the

air. If a loud cry is heard in the forest, it is that

of the Skogsr^ (spirit of the wood), which should be

answered only by a He! when it can do no harm.

(Keise durch Sweden; quoted by Thorpe.)
The elf-shot was known in England in very remote

times, as appears from the Anglo-Saxon incantation,

printed by Grimm in his Deutsche Mythologie, and
in the appendix to Kemble's Saxons in England:
Gif hit woere esa gescot ot$t5e hit wcere ylfa gescot ;
that is, if it were an asa-shot or an elf-shot. On this

subject Grimm says : It is a very old belief that

dangerous arrows were shot by the elves from the air.

The thunder-bolt is also called elf-shot, and in Scot-



NOTES. 259

land a hard, sharp, wedge-shaped stone is known by
the name of elf-arrow, elf-flint, elf-bolt, which, it is

supposed, has been sent by the spirits. (Quoted bj

Thorpe.)

CHAPTER VII.

Our ancestors divided the universe into nine worlds,
and these again into three groups:

1. Over the earth. Muspelheim, Ljosalfaheim and

Asaheim.

2. On the earth. Jotunheim, Midgard and Yan-
heim.

3. Below the earth. Svartalfaheim, Mflheim and

ISrifihel.

The gods had twelve abodes :
1. Thrudheim. The abode of Thor. His realm is

Thrudvang, and his palace is Bilskirner.

2. YdALEE. Uller's abode.
3. Yalaskjalf. Odin's hall.

4. SoKVABEK. The abode of Saga.
5. Gladsheim, where there are twelve seats for

the gods, besides the throne occupied by Alfather.
6. Thkymheim. Skade's abode,

Y. Breidablik, Balder' s abode.

8. HiMMiNBjoRO. Heimdal's abode.

9. FoLKVANG. Freyja's abode.
10. Olitner. Forsete's abode.

11. E'oATUN. Ejord's abode
12. Landvide. Yidar's abode.

According to the Lay of Grimner, the gods had
twelve horses, but the owner of each horse is not

given :

(1) Sleipner (Odin's), (2) Goldtop (Heimdal's),



260 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

(3) Glad, (4) Gyller, (5) Gler, (6) Skeidbrimer, (Y)

Silvertop, (8) Siner, (9) Gisl, (10) Falhofner, (11)

Lightfoot, (12) Blodughofdi (Frey's).
The owners of nine of them are not given, and,

moreover, it is stated that Thor had no horse, but

always either went on foot or drove his goats.
The favorite numbers are three, nine and twelve.

Monotheism was recognized in the unknown god,
who is from everlasting to everlasting. A number
of trinities were established, and the nine worlds

were classified into three groups. The week had nine

days, and originally there were probably but nine

gods, that is, before the vans were united with the

asas. The number nine occurs where Heimdal is
said to have nine mothers, Menglad is said to have

nine maid-servants, ^ger had nine daughters, etc.
When the vans were united with the asas, the number
rose to twelve :

(1) Odin, (2) Thor, (3) Tyr, (4) Balder, (5) Hoder,

(6) Heimdal, (7) Hermod, (8) ISTjord, (9) Frey, (10)
UUer, (11) Yidar, (12) Forsete.

If we add to this list Brage, Yale and Loke, we get
fifteen ; but the Eddas everywhere declare that there

are twelve gods, who were entitled to divine worship.
The number of the goddesses is usually given as

twenty-six.

CHAPTER YIII.

Loke and his offspring are so fully treated in our

Norse Mythology, that we content ourselves by re-

ferring our readers to that work.



NOTES. 261

CHAPTER IX.

Frejja's ornament Brising. In the saga of Olaf

Tryggvason, there is a rather awkward story of the
manner in which Freyja became possessed of her
ornament. Freyja, it is told, was a mistress of Odin.

Not far from the palace dwelt four dwarfs, whose
names were Alfrig, Dvalin, Berling and Grer ; they
were skillful smiths. Looking one day into their

stony dwelling, Freyja saw them at work on a beauti-
ful golden necklace, or collar, which she offered to

buy, but which they refused to part with, except on

conditions quite incompatible with the fidelity she

owed to Odin, but to which she, nevertheless, was

tempted to accede. Thus the ornament became hers.

By some means this transaction came to the knowl-

edge of Loke, who told it to Odin. Odin commanded
him to get possession of the ornament. This was no

easy task, for no one could enter Freyja's bower
without her consent. He went away whimpering,
but most were glad on seeing him in such tribulation.
When he came to the locked bower, he could no-
where find an entrance, and, it being cold weather,
he began to shiver. He then transformed himself
into a fly and tried every opening, but in vain ; there

was nowhere air enough to make him to get through
[Loke (fire) requires air]. At length he found a hole
in the roof, but not bigger than the prick of a needle.

Through this he slipt. On his entrance he looked
around to see if anyone were awake, but all were

buried in sleep. He peeped in at Freyja's bed, and
saw that she had the ornament round her neck, but

that the lock was on the side she lay on. He then



262 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

transformed himself to a flea, placed himself on Frey-

ja's cheek, and stung her so that she awoke, but only
turned herself round and slept again. He then laid
aside his assumed form, cautiously took the orna-

ment, unlocked the bower, and took his prize to
Odin. In the morning, on waking, Freyja seeing
the door open, without having been forced, and that

her ornament was gone, instantly understood the whole
affair. Having dressed herself, she repaired to Odin's

hall, and upbraided him with having stolen her orna-

ment, and insisted on its restoration, which she finally
obtained. (Quoted by Thorpe.)

Mention is also made of the Brosinga-men in the
Beowulf (verse 2394). Here it is represented as be-

longing to Hermanric, but the legend concerning it

has never been found.

CHAPTER X.

This myth about Frey and Gerd is the subject of
one of the most fascinating poems in the Elder Edda,
the Journey of Skirner. It is, as Auber Forestier, in
Echoes from Mistland, says, the germ of the Niblung
story. Frey is Sigurd or Sigfrid, and Gerd is Bryn-
hild. The myth is also found in another poem of
the Elder Edda, the Lay of Fjolsvin, in which the

god himself
— there called Svipday (the hastener of

the day)
— undertakes the journey to arouse from the

winter sleep the cold giant nature of the maiden Men-

glad (the sun-radiant daughter), who is identical with

Freyja (the goddess of spring, promise, or of love

between man and woman, and who can easily be com-

pared with Gerd). Before the bonds which enchain

the maiden can in either case be broken, Bele (the



NOTES. 263

giant of spring storms, corresponding to the dragon
Fafner in the Mblung story,) must be conquered,
and Wafurloge (the wall of bickering flames that sur-

rounded the castle) must be penetrated. The fanes

symbolize the funeral pyre, for whoever enters the

nether world must scorn the fear of death. (Auber
Forestier's Echoes from Mistland; Introduction, xliii,

xliv.) We also And this story repeated again and
again, in numberless variations, in Teutonic folk-lore ;
for instance, in The Maiden on the Glass Mountain,
where the glass mountain takes the place of the bick-

ering flame.

CHAPTER XL

The tree Lerad (furnishing protection) must be

regarded as a branch of Ygdrasil.

CHAPTER XII.

In Heimskringla Skidbladner is called Odin's ship.
This is correct. All that belonged to the gods was

his also.

CHAPTER XIIL

For a thorough analysis of Thor as a spring god,
as the god who dwells in the clouds, as the god of
thunder and lightning, as the god of agriculture, in

short, as the god of culture, we can do no better than
to refer our readers to Der Mythus von Thor, nach
Nordischen Quellen, von Ludwig Uhland, Stuttgart,
1836

;
and to Handbuch der Deutschen Mythologie,

mit Einschluss der Nordischen, von Karl Simrock,
Yierte Auflage, Bonn, 1874.



264 THE YOUisraER edda.

CHAPTER XIV.

The death of Balder is justly regarded as the most
beautiful myth in Teutonic mythology. It is con-
nected with the Lay of Yegtam in the Elder Edda.
Like so many other myths (Frey and Gerd, The Rob-

bing of Idun, etc.) the myth symbolizes originally the
end of summer and return of spring. Thus Balder
dies every year and goes to Hel. But in the follow-

ing spring he returns to the asas, and gladdens all

things living and dead with his pure shining light.

Gradually, however, the myth was changed from a

symbol of the departing and returning summer, and

applied to the departing and returning of the world

year, and thus the death of Balder prepares the way
for Ragnarok and Regeneration. Balder goes to Hel

and does not return to this world. Thokk refuses to

weep for him. His return is promised after Ragna-
rok. The next spring does not bring him back, but

the rejuvenated earth. Thus the death of Balder be-

comes the central thought in the drama of the fate

of the gods and of the world. It is inseparably con-

nected with the punishment of Loke and the twilight
of the gods. The winter following the death of Balder

is not an ordinary winter, but the Fimbul-winter,

which is followed by no summer, but by the destruc-

tion of the world. The central idea in the Odinic re-

ligion, the destruction and regeneration of the world,
has taken this beautiful sun-myth of Balder into its

service. Balder is then no more merely the pure holy

light of heaven ; he symbolizes at the same time the

purity and innocence of the gods ; he is changed from

a physical to an ethical myth. He impersonated al



NOTES. 265

that was good and holy in the life of the gods ; and so

it came to pass that when the golden age had ceased,
when thirst for gold (Gulveigj, when sin and crime
had come into the world, he was too good to live

in it. As in Genesis fratricide (Cain and Abel) fol-
lowed upon the eating of the forbidden fruit, and the

loss of paradise ; so, when the golden age (paradise)
had ended among the asas, Loke (the serpent) brought
fratricide (Hoder and Balder) among the gods ; them-
selves and our ancestors regarded fratricide as the

lowest depth of moral depravity. After the death of

Balder

Brothers slay brothers,

Sisters' children

Shed each other's blood,
Hard grows the world.
Sensual sin waxes huge.

There are sword-ages, ax-ages
—

Shields are cleft in twain,
—

Storm-ages, murder-ages,
Till the world falls dead.
And men no longer spare
Or pity one another.

Upon the whole we may say that a sun-myth first

represents the death of the day at sunset, when the sky
is radiant as if dyed in blood. In the flushing morn

light wins its victory again. Then this same myth be-
comes transferred to the death and birth of summer.

Once more it is lifted into a higher sphere, while still

holding on to its physical interpretation, and is applied
to the world year. Finally, it is clothed v/itli ethical at-

tributes, becomes thoroughly anthropomorphized, and

typifies the good and the evil, the virtues and vices

(light and darkness), in the character and life of gods



266 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

and of men. Thus we get four stages in tlie develop-
ment of the myth.

CHAPTER XV.

Ragnarok. The word is found written in two ways,
Ragnarok and ragnarokr. E-agna is genitive plural,
from the word regin (god), and means of the gods.
E-ok means reason, ground, origin, a wonder, sign,
marvel. It is allied to the O. H. G. rahha = sentence,
judgment. Ragnarok would then mean the history of
the gods^ and applied to the dissolution of the world,

might be translated the last judgment^ doomsday, weird

of gods and the world, Rokr means twilight^ and

Ragnarokr, as the Younger Edda has it, thus means
the twilight of the gods, and the latter is adopted by

nearly all modern writers, although Gudbr. Yigfusson
declares that Ragnarok (doomsday) is no doubt the

correct form. And this is also to be said in favor of

doomsday, that Ragnarok does not involve only the

twilight, but the whole night of the gods and the world.

THE NIFLUNGS AND GJUKUNGS.

This chapter of Skaldkajparmal contains much
valuable material for a correct understanding of the

Nibelungen-Lied, especially as to the origin of the

Niblung hoard, and the true character of Brynhild.
The material given here, and in the Icelandic Yol-

sunga Saga, has been used by Wm. Morris in his
Sigurd the Yolsung and the Fall of the JS'iblungs.
In the Mbelungen-Lied, as transposed by Auber

Forestier, in Echoes from Mist-Land, we have a per-
fect gem of literature from the middle high German



NOTES. 267

period, but its author had lost sight of the divine and

mythical origin of the material that he wove into hi&

poem. It is only by combining the German Nibe-

lungen-Lied with the mythical materials found in

Norseland that our national Teutonic epic can be

restored to us. Wagner has done this for us in his
famous drama

;
Jordan has done it in his Sigfrid's

saga ; Morris has done it in the work mentioned

above
;
but will not Auber Forestier gather up all

the scattered fragments relating to Sigurd and Bryn-

hild, and weave them together into a prose narrative,
that shall delight the young and the old of this great
land ?

We are glad to welcome at this time a new book
in the field of Mblung literature. We refer to Geibel's
Brunhild, translated, with introduction and notes, by
Prof. G. Theo. Dippold, and recently published in

Boston.

MENJA AND FENJA.

This is usually called the peace of Frode, which

corresponds to the golden age in the life of the asas.

Avarice is the root of crime, and all other evils.

Avarice is at the bottom of all the endless woes of

the Mblung story. The myth explaining why the
sea is salt is told in a variety of forms in diiferent

countries. In Germany there are several folk-lore
stories and traditions in regard to it. In l^orway,
where folk-lore tales are so abundant, we find the

myth about Menja and Fenja recurring in the follow-

ing form :



268 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

WHY THE SEA IS SALT.

Long, long ago there were two brothers, the one
was rich and the other was poor. On Christmas eve
the poor one had not a morsel of bread or meat in his

house, and so he went to his brother and asked him
for mercy's sake to give him something for Christ-
mas. It was not the first time the brother had had
to give him, and he was not very much pleased to see
him this time either.

" If you will do what I ask of you, I will give you
a whole ham of pork," said he.

The poor man promised immediately, and was very
thankful besides.

"There you have it, now go to hell," said the rich
one, and threw the ham at him.

"What I have promised, I suppose, I must keep,"
said the other. He took the ham and started. He
walked and walked the whole day, and at twilight he

came to a place where everything looked so bright
and splendid.

"This must be the place," thought the man with
the ham.

Out in the wood-shed stood an old man with a long
white beard, cutting wood for Christmas.

" Good evening," said the man with the ham.
' ' Good evening, sir. Wliere are you going so

late ?
"

said the man.
' '

I am on my way to hell, if I am on the right
road," said the poor man.

"Yes, you have taken the right road; it is here,"
said the old man. "Kow when you get in, they will
all want to buy your ham, for pork is rare food in



NOTES. 269

hell
;

but jou must not sell it, unless you get the
hand-mill that stands back of the door for it. When
you come out again I will show you how to regulate
it. You will find it useful in more than one respect.

' '

The man with the ham thanked the old man for
this valuable information, and rapped at the devil's

door.

When he came in it happened as the old man had
said. All the devils, both the large ones and the

small ones, crowded around him like ants around a

worm, and the one bid higher than the other for the
ham.

"It is true my wife and I were to have it for our
Christmas dinner, but, seeing that you are so eager
for it, I suppose I will have to let you have it," said
the man. ' ' But if I am to sell it, I want that hand-
mill that stands behind the door there for it."

The devil did not like to spare it, and kept dicker-

ing and bantering with the man, but he insisted, and

so the devil had to give him the hand-mill. When
the man came out in the yard he asked the old wood-

chopper how he should regulate the mill ; and when
he had learned how to do it, he said "thank you,"
and made for home as fast as he could. But still
he did not reach home before twelve o'clock in the

night Christmas eve.

"Why, where in the world have you been?
"

said

the woman. "Here I have been sitting hour after
hour waiting and waiting, and I haven't as much as
two sticks to put on the fire so as to cook the Christ-

mas porridge."
"
Oh, I could not come any sooner. I had several

errands to do, and I had a long way to go too. But



i^70 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

now I will show jou," said the man. He set the
mill on the table, and had it first grind light, then
a table-cloth, then food and ale and all sorts of good
things for Christmas, and as he commanded the mill

ground. The woman expressed her great astonish-
ment again and again, and wanted to know where her
husband had gotten the mill, but this he would not
tell.

"It makes no difference where I have gotten it;

jou see the mill is a good one, and that the water
does not freeze," said the man.

Then he ground food and drink, and all good
things, for the whole Christmas week, and on the

third day he invited his friends : he was going to

have a party. When the rich brother saw all the
nice and good things at the party, he became very
wroth, for he could not bear to see his brother have

anything.
"Christmas eve he was so needy that he came to

me and asked me for mercy's sake to give him a little
food, and now he gives a feast as though he were
both count and king," said he to the others.

' ' But where in hell have you gotten all your riches

from? " said he to his brother.

"Behind the door," answered he who owned the
mill. He did not care to give any definite account,
but later in the evening, when he began to get a little

tipsy, he could not help himself and brought out the

mill.

"There you see the one that has given me all the
riches." said he, and then he let the mill grind both

one thing and another. When the brother saw this
he was bound to have the mill, and after a long



NOTES. 271

bantering about it, lie finally was to have it ; but
lie was to pay three hundred dollars for it, and his
brother was to keep it until harvest.

"When I keep it until then, I shall have ground
food enough to last many years," thought he.

Of course the mill got no chance to grow rusty
-during the next six months, and when harvest-time

came, the rich brother got it ; but the other man had
taken good care not to show him how to regulate it.
It was in the evening that the rich man brought the
mill home, and in the morning he bade his wife go
and spread the hay after the mowers,

— he would get
dinner ready, he said. Toward dinner he put the
mill on the table.

''Grind fish and gruel : Grind both well and fast!"

said the man, and the mill began to grind fish and

gruel. It first filled all the dishes and tubs full, and

after that it covered the whole floor with fish and

gruel. The man kept puttering and tinkering, and
tried to get the mill to stop ; but no matter how he
turned it and fingered at it, the mill kept on, and

before long the gruel got so deep in the room that
the man was on the point of drowning. Then he

opened the door to the sitting-room, but before long
that room was filled too, and the man had all he
could do to get hold of the door-latch down in this
flood of gruel. When he got the door open he did
not remain long in the room. He ran out as fast as
he could, and there was a perfect flood of fish gruel
behind, deluging the yard and his fields.

The wife, who was in the meadow making hay, be-

gan to think that it took a long time to get dinner

ready.



272 THE YOUNGER EDDA.

^'Even if husband does not call us, we will have
to go anyway. 1 suppose he does not know much
about making gruel ; I will have to go and help
him," said the woman to the mowers.

They went homeward, but on coming up the hill

they met the flood of fish and gruel and bread, the
one mixed up with the other, and the man came run-

ning ahead of the flopd.
''Would that each one of you had an hundred

stomachs, but have a care that you do not drown in

the gruel flood," cried the husband. He ran by them
as though the devil had been after him, and hastened

down to his brother. He begged him in the name of

everything sacred to come and take the mill away

immediately.
''If it grinds another hour the whole settlement

will perish in fish and gruel," said he.

But the brother would not take it unless he got
three hundred dollars, and this money had to be paid
to him.

Kow the poor brother had both money and the
mill, and so it did not take long before he got him-

self a farm, and a much nicer one than his brother's.

With his mill he ground out so much, gold that he

covered his house all over with sheets of gold. The

house stood down by the sea-shore, and it glistened
far out upon the sea. All who sailed past had to go
ashore and visit the rich man in the golden house,
and all wanted to see the wonderful mill, for its fame

spread far and wide, and there was none
who had not

heard speak of it.

After a long time there came a sea-captain
who



NOTES. 273

wished to see the mill. He asked whether it could

grind salt.

''Yes, it can grind salt," said he who owned the
mill

;
and when the captain heard this, he was bound

to have it, let it cost what it will. For if he had that,

thought he, he would not have to sail far off over

dangerous waters after cargoes of salt. At first the
man did not wish to sell it, but the captain teased
and begged and finally the man sold it, and got many
thousand dollarg for it. When the captain had gotten
the mill on his back, he did not stay there long, for

he was afraid the man might reconsider the bargain
and back out again. He had no time to ask how to

regulate it; he went to his ship as fast as he could,
and when he had gotten some distance out upon the

sea, he got his mill out.

"Grind salt both fast and well," said the captain.
The mill began to grind salt, and that with all its

might. When the captain had gotten the ship full
he wanted to stop the mill ; but no matter how he

worked, and no matter how he handled it, the mill

kept grinding as fast as ever, and the heap of salt

kept growing larger and larger, and at last the ship
sank. The mill stands on the bottom of the sea

grinding this very day, and so it comes that the sea

is salt.





VOOABULART,

Adils. a king who reigned in Upsala.
Ae. a dwarf.
iEGER. The god presiding over the stormy sea.
Alp. a dwarf.
Alfather. a name of Odin.
Alfheim. The home of the elves.
Alfrig. a dwarf.
Alsvid. One of the horses of the sun.

Althjof. a dwarf,
Alvis. a dwarf.
Amsvartner. The name of the lake in which the island was

situated where the wolf Fenrer was chained.

Andhrimner. The cook in Valhal.
"

Andlang. The second heaven.
Andvare. a dwarf.
Andvare-naut. The ring in the Niblung story.
Angerboda. a giantess; mother of the Fenris-wolf.
Annar. Husband of Night and father of Jord.
Arvak. The name of one of the horses of the sun.
AsAHEiM. The home of the asas.
AsALAND. The land of the asas.
Asas. The Teutonic gods.
Asa-Thor. a common name for Thor.
AsGARD. The residence of the gods.
Ask. The name of the first man created by Odin, Honer and Loder.
AsLAUG. Daughter of Sigurd and Brynhild.
AsMUND. A man visited by Odin.
AsYNJES. The Teutonic goddesses
Atle. Gudrun's husband after the death of Sigurd.
Atrid. a name of Odin.
AuD. The son of Night and Naglfare. %
AuDHUMBLA. The cow that nourished the giant Ymer.
AuDUN. A name derived from Odin.
Aurgelmer. a giant; grandfather of Bergelmer; the same as

Ymer.
275



276 VOCABULARY.

AuBVANG. A dwarf.
AusTRE. A dwarf.
Bafur. a dwarf.
Balder. Son of Odin and Frigg, slain by Hoder.
Baleyg. a name of Odin.
Bar-Isle. A cool grove in which Gerd agreed with Skimer to meet

Frey.

Bauge. a brother of Suttung. Odin worked for him one summer^
in order to get his help in obtaining Suttung's mead of poetry.

Beigud. One of Rolf Krake's berserks.
Bele. a giant, brother of Gerd, slain by Frey.
Bergelmer. a giant; son of Thrudgelmer and grandson of

Aurgelmer.
Berling. a dwarf.
Bestla. Wife of Bure and mother of Odin.

BiFLiDE, A name of Odin.
BiFLiNDE. A name of Odin.
BiFROST. The rainbow.
BiFUR. A dwarf.
BiKKE. A minister of Jormunrek; causes Randver to be hanged,

and Svanhild trodden to death by horses.

BiL. One of the children that accompany Moon.

BiLEYG. A name of Odin.
BiLSKiRNER. Thor's abode.

Blain. a dwarf.
Blodughofde. Frey's horse.
BoDN. One of the three jars in which the poetic mead is kept.
BODVAR Bjarke. One of Rolf Krake's berserks.
BoL. One of the rivers flowing out of Hvergelmer.
Bolthorn. a giant; father of Bestla, mother of Odin.
BoLVERK. A name of Odin.
BoMBUR. A dwarf.
BoR. Son of Bure; father of Odin.

Brage. a son of Odin; the best of skalds.
Breidablik. The abode of Balder.
Brimer. One of the heavenly halls after Ragnarok.
Bribing.

;^eyja's
necklace.

Brok. a dwarf.
Brynhild. One of the chief heroines in the Niblung story.
Budle. Father of Atle and Brynhild.
Bue. a son of Vesete, who settled in Borgundarholm.



VOOABUIiAEY. 277

BuRE. Grandfather of Odin.

Byleist. a brother of Loke.
Byrger. a well from which Bil and Hjuke were going when they

were taken by Moon.

Dain. a dwarf.
Dain. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
Datnsleif. Hogne's sword.

Day. Son of Delling.
Daybreak. The father of Day.
Delling. Daybreak.
DoLGTHVARE. A dwarf.
DoRE. A dwarf.
Draupner. Odin's ring.
Drome. One of the fetters with which the Fenris-wolf was chained.

DuF. A dwarf.
DuNEY. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DuRATHRO. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DuRiN. A dwarf.
DvALiN. One of the stags that bite the leaves of Ygdrasil.
DvALiN. A dwarf.
EiKiNSKjALDE. A dwarf.
EiKTHYRNER. A hart that stands over Odin's hall.
EiLiF. Son of Gudrun; a skald.

EiMYRjA, One of the daughters of Haloge and Glod.

EiNDRiDE. A name of Thor.
EiR. An attendant of Menglod, and the best of all in the healing

art.

Ekin. One of the rivers flowing from Hvergelmer.
Elder. A servant of -^ger.
Eldhrimner. The kettle in which the boar Sahrimner is cooked in

Valhal.

Elivogs. The ice-cold streams that flow out of Niflheim.
Eljudner. Hel's hall.
Elle. An old woman (old age) with whom Thor wrestled in Jotun-

heim.

Embla. The first woman created by Odin, Honer and Loder.
Endil. The name of a giant.
Erp. a son of Jonaker, murdered by Sorle and Hamder.
Eylime. The father of Hjordis, mother of Volsung.
Eysa. One of the daughters of Haloge and Glod.
Pafner. Son of Hreidmar, killed by Sigurd.



278 VOCABULAKY.

Fal. a dwarf.
Falhopner. One of the horses of the gods.
Farbaute. The father of Loke.
Farmagod. One of the names of Odin.
Farmatyr. One of the names of Odin.
Fenja. a female slave who ground at Frode's mill.
Fenris-wolp. The monster wolf, son of Loke.
Fensaler. The abode of Frigg.
Fid. a dwarf.
File. A dwarf.
FiMAPENG. jEger's servant.

FiMBUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FiMBULTHUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer,
FiMBUL-TYR. The unknown god.
FiMBUL-WINTER. The great and awful winter of three years'

duration preceding Ragnarok.
FiNNSLEiP. A byrnie belonging to King Adils, of Upsala.
FjALAR. A dwarf.
Fjolner. a name of Odin.
Fjolsvid. a name of Odin.
Fjorgvin. The mother of Frigg and of Thor.
FjoRM. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FoLKVANG. Freyja's abode.
Form. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
FoRNJOT. The ancient giant; the father of iEger.
Forsete. The peace-maker; son of Balder and Nanna.

Frananger Force. The waterfall into which Loke cast himself
in the likeness of a salmon.

Freke. One of Odin's wolves.

Frey. Son of Njord and husband of Skade.

Freyja. The daughter of Njord and sister of Frey.
Fridleip. a son of Skjold.
Frigg. Wife of Odin and mother of the gods.
Frode. Grandson of Skjold.
Froste. a dwarf.
FuLLA. Frigg's attendant.

FuNDiN. A dwarf.
Fyre. a river in Sweden.
Gagnrad. a name of Odin.
Galar. a dwarf.
Gandolp. a dwarf.



VOCABULARY. 279

Gang. A giant.
Ganglare. a name of Odin.
Ganglate. Hel's man-servant.
Ganglere. a name of Odin.
Ganglot. Hel's maid-servant.
Gangrad. a name of Odin.
Gardropa. a horse.
Garm. a dog that barks at Ragnarok.
Gaut. a name of Odin.
Gefjun. a goddess; she is present at iEger's feast.
Gefn. One of the names of Freyja.
Geirahod. a valkyrie.
Geirrod. a giant visited by Thor.
Geir Skogul. a valkyrie.
Geirvimul. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Gelgja. The fetter with which the Fenris-wolf was chained.
Gerd. a beautiful giantess, daughter of Gymer.
Gere. One of Odin's wolves.
Gersame. One of the daughters of Freyja.
GiLLiNG. Father of Suttung, who possessed the poetic mead.
GiMLE. The abode of the righteous after Ragnarok.
GiNNAR. A dwarf.
GiNUNGAGAP. The premundane abyss.
GiPUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GiSL. One of the horses of the gods.
Gjallar-bridge. The bridge across the river Gjol, near Helheim.

Gjallar-horn. Heimdal's horn.
Gjallar-river. The river near Helheim.

Gjalp. One of the daughters of Geirrod.
Gjuke. a king in Germany, visited by Sigurd.
Gladsheim. Odin's dwelling.
Glam. The name of a giant.
Glapsvid. a name of Odin.
Glaser. a grove in A^gard.
Gleipner. The last fetter with which the wolf Fenrer was bound.
Glener. The husband of Sol (sun).
Gler. One of the horses of the gods.
Glitner. Forsete's hall.

Gloin. a dwarf.
Gna. Frigg's messenger.
Gnipa-cave. The cave before which the dog Garm barks.



280 VOCABULARY.

Gnita-heath. Fafner's abode, where he kept the treasure of the

Niblungs.

GoiN. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
GoL. A valkyrie.
GoLDPAX. The giant Hrungner's horse.

GoMUL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
GoNDLER. One of the names of Odin.

GoNDUL. A valkyrie.
GopuL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Got. a name of Odin.
GoTE. Gunnar's horse.

GoTHORM. A son of Gjuke; murders Sigurd, and is slain by him.
Grabak. One of the serpents under Ygdrasil.
Grad. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Grafvitner. a serpent under Ygdrasil.
Grapvollud. a serpent under Ygdrasil.
Gram. Sigurd's sword.
Grane. Sigurd's horse.
Greip. One of the daughters of Geirrod.

Grid. A giantess visited by Thor.
GridARVOL. Grid's staff.
Grim. A name of Odin.
Grimhild. Gjuke 's queen.
Grimner. One of the names of Odin.

Grjottungard. The place where Thor fought with Hrungner.
Groa. a giantess, mother of Orvandel.
Grotte. The name of King Frode's mill.
GuD. A valkyrie.
GuDNY. One of the children of Gjuke.
GuDRUN. The famous daughter of Gjuke.
GuLLiNBURSTE. The name of Frey's boar.
GuLLiNTANNE. A name of Heimdal.
GuLLTOP. Heimdal's horse.

GuLLVEiG. A personification of gold; she is pierced and burnt.
GuNGNER. Odin's spear.
GuNLAD. The daughter of the giant Suttung.
GuNN. A valkyrie.
GuNNAR. The famous son of Gjuke.
GuNTHRAiN. One of the rivers flowing from Hvergelmer.
GwODAN. An old name for Odin.



VOCABULARY. 281

Gylfe. a king of Svithjod, who visited Asgard under the name of
Ganglere.

Gyller. Ore of the horses of the gods.
Gymer. Another name of the ocean divinity -^ger.
Habrok. A celebrated hero.
Hallinskide. Another name of Heimdal.
Haloge. a giant, son of Fornjot; also called Loge.
Hamder. Son of Jonaker and Gudrun, incited by his mother to

avenge his sister's death.

Hamskerper. a horse; the sire of Hofvarpner, which was Gna's
horse.

Hangagod. a name of Odin.
HangATYR. A name of Odin.
Haptagod. a name of Odin.
Har. The High One; applied to Odin.
Harbard. a name assumed by Odin.
Hate. The wolf bounding before the sun, and will at last catch

the moon.

Heide. Another name for Gullveig.
Heidrun. a goat that stands over Valhal.
Heimdal. The god of the rainbow.

Heimer. Brynhild's foster-father.
Hel. The goddess of death; daughter of Loke.
Helblinde. a name of Odin.
Helmet-bearer. A name of Odin.
Hengekjapt. The man to whom King Frode gave his mill.
Hepte. a dwarf.
Heran. a name of Odin.
Herfather. a name of Odin.
Herjan. a name of Odin.
Hermod. The god who rode on Sleipner to Hel, to get Balder back,
Herteit. a name of Odin.
HiLD. A valkyrie.
HiLDESViN. A helmet, which King Adils took from King Ale.
HiMiNBJORG. Heimdal's dwelling.
HiNDFELL. The place where Brynhild sat in her hall, surrounded

by the Vafurloge.
HjALMBORE. A name of Odin.
Hjalprek. a king in Denmark; collects a fleet for Sigurd.
Hjatle the Valiant. One of Rolf Krake's berserks.
HjORDis. Married to Sigmund, and mother of Sigurd.



282 VOCABULAKY.

Hjuke. One of the children that accompany Moon.
Hledjolf. a dwarf.
Hler. Another name of ^ger.
Hlidskjalf. The seat of Odin, whence he looked out over all the

world.

Hlin. One of the attendants of Frigg; Frigg herself is sometimes
called by this name.

Hlodyn. Thor's mother.
Hlok. a valkyrie.
Hloride. a name of Thor.
Hnikar. a name of Odin.
Hnikud. a name of Odin.
Hnitbjorg. The place where Suttung hid the poetic mead.
Hnos. Freyja's daughter.
HoDER. The slayer of Balder; he is blind.
Hodmimer's-holt. The grove where the two human beings, Lif

and Lifthraser, were preserved during Ragnarok.
HoPVARPNER. Gna's horse.
Hoqne. a son of Gjuke.
HoNER. One of the three creating gods; with Odin and Loder he

creates Ask and Embla.
HoR. A dwarf.
Horn. A name of Freyja.
Hrasvelg. a giant in an eagle's plumage, who produces the wind.
Hreidmar. The father of Regin and Fafner.
Hrid. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Hrimfaxe. The horse of Night.
Hringhorn. The ship upon which Raider's body was burned.
Hrist. a valkyrie.
Hrodvitner. a wolf; father of the wolf Hate.
Hron. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Hroptatyr. a name of Odin.
Hrotte. Fafner's sword.
Hrungner. a giant; Thor slew him.
Hrym. a giant, who steers the ship Naglfar at Ragnarok.
Hvergelmer. The fountain in the middle of Niflheim.
Huge. A person (Thought) who ran a race with Thjalfe, in Jotun-

heim.

Hugin. One of Odin's ravens.

Hugstore. a dwarf.



VOCABULARY. 283

Hymer. a giant with whom Thor went fishing when he caught
the Midgard-serpent.

Hyndla. a vala visited by Freyja.
HyRroken. a giantess who launched the ship on which Balder

was burned.

Ida. a plain where the gods first assemble, and where they as-
semble again after Ragnarok.

Idavold. The same.

Ide. a giant, son of Olvalde.
Idun. Wife of Brage; she kept the rejuvenating apples.
Ironwood. The abode of giantesses called Jarnveds.
IvA. A river in Jotunheim.
IvALD. The father of the dwarfs that made Sif 's hair, the ship

Skidbladner, and Odin's spear Gungner.
Jafnhar. a name of Odin.
Jalg. a name of Odin.
Jalk. a name of Odin.
Jarnsaxa. One of Heimdal's nine giant mothers.

Jarnved. The same as Ironwood.
Jarnvidjis. The giantesses dwelling in Ironwood.

JoRD. Wife of Odin, mother of Thor.

JoRMUNDGAND. The Midgard-serpent.
JoRMUNREK. King of Goths, marries Svanhild.
JoRUVOLD. The country where Aurvang is situated. Thence come

several dwarfs.

Jotunheim. The home of the giants.
Kerlaugs. The rivers that Thor every day must cross.

Kile. A dwarf.
Kjaler. a name of Odin.
KoRMT. A river which Thor every day must cross.
KvASER. The hostage given by the vans to the asas; his blood,

when slain, was the poetical meed kept by Suttung.
Lading. One of the fetters with which the Fenris-wolf was bound.

Landvide. Vidar's abode.
Laufey. Loke's mother.
Leipt. One of the rivers flowing out of Hvergelmer.
Lerad. a tree near Valhal.
Letpet. One of the horses of the gods.
LiF. )The two persons preserved in Hodmimer's-holt
LiFTHRASER. ) during Ragnarok.
Lit. a dwarf.



284 VOCABULAEY.

Ljosalpaheim. The home of the light elves.
LoDER. One of the three gods who created Ask and Embla.
LoFN. One of the asynjes.
LoGE. A giant who tried his strength at eating with Loke in Jotun-

heim.

Loke. The giant-god of the Norse mythology.
LoPT. Another name for Loke.
LovAR. A dwarf.
Lyngve. The island where the Fenris-wolf was chained.
Magne. a son of Thor.
Mannheim. The home of man; our earth.
Mardol. One of the names of Freyja.
Megingjarder. Thor's belt.
Meile. a son of Odin.
Menglad. Svipdag's betrothed.
Menja. a female slave who ground at Frode's mill.
MiDGARD. The name of the earth in the mythology.
Midvitne. a giant.
MiMER. The name of the wise giant; keeper of the holy well
Mist. A valkyrie.
Mjodvitner. a dwarf.
Mjolner. Thor's hammer.
MjOTUD. A name of Odin.
Mode. One of Thor's sons.
MoDGUD. The may who guards the Gjallar-bridge.
Modsogner. a dwarf.
MoiN. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
MoKKERKALPE. A clay giant in the myth of Thor and Hrungner.
Moon, brother of Sun. Both children of Mundilfare.
MooNGARM. A wolf of Loke's offspring; he devours the moon.
Morn. A troll-woman.
Mundilfare. Father of the sun and moon.
Munin. One of Odin's ravens.
Muspel. The name of an abode of fire.
MusPELHEiM. The world of blazing light before the creation.
Na. a dwarf.
Naglfar. a mythical ship made of nail-parings; it appears in

Ragnarok.
Nain. a dwarf.
Nal. Mother of Loke.
Nanna. Daughter of Nep; mother of Forsete, and wife of Balder.



VOCABULARY. 285

Nare. Son of Loke; also called Narfe.

Narfe. See Nare.
Nastrand. a place of punishment for the wicked after Ragnarok.
Nep. Father of Nanna.

NiBLUNGS. Identical with Gjukungs.
NiDA Mountains. A place where there is, after Ragnarok, a golden

hall for the race of Sindre (the dwarfs).

NiDE, A dwarf.
NiDHUG. A serpent in the nether world.
NiPLHEiM. The world of mist before the creation.

NiFLUNGS. Identical with Niblungs.
Night. Daughter of Norfe.

NiKAR. A name of Odin.
NiKUZ. A name of Odin.
NiPiNG. A dwarf.
Njord. A van; husband of Skade, and father of Frey and Freyja.
NoATUN. Njord's dwelling.
NoN. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Nor. The man after whom Norway was supposed to have been

named.

NoRDRE. A dwarf.
Norfe. A giant, father of Night.
NoRNS. The weird sisters.

Not. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Ny. a dwarf.
Nye. a dwarf.
Nyrad. a dwarf.
Oder. Freyja's husband.

Odin. Son of Bor and Bestla; the chief of Teutonic gods.
Odrarer. One of the vessels in which the poetic mead was kept.
Ofner. a serpent under Ygdrasil.
OiN. A dwarf.
Oku-Thor. a name of Thor.
Olvalde. a giant; 'father of Thjasse, Ide and Gang.
Ome. a name of Odin.
Onar. a dwarf.
Orboda. Wife of the giant Gymer.
Ore. a dwarf.
Ormt. One of the rivers that Thor has to cross.
Orner. The name of a giant.



286 VOCABULARY.

Orvandel. The husband of Groa, the vala who sang magic songs
over Thor after he had fought with Hrungner.

OsKE. A name of Odin.
Otter. A son of Hreidmar; in the form of an otter lie was killed

by Loke.

QuASER. See Kvaser.

Radgrid. a valkjTie.
Radsvid. a dwarf.
Rafnagud. a name of Odin.
Ragnarok. The last day; the dissolution of the gods and the

world; the twilight of the gods.

Ran. The goddess of the sea; wife of Mger.
Randgrid. a Valkyrie.
Randver. a son of Jormunrek.
Ratatosk. a squirrel in Ygdrasil.
Rate. An auger used by Odin in obtaining the poetic mead.
Regin. Son of Hreidmar.

Reginleip. a valkyrie.
Reidartyr. a name of Odin.
Rek. a dwarf.
Rind. Mother of Vale.

RoGNER. A name of Odin.
RosKVA. Thor's maiden follower.

Sahrimner. The boar on which the gods and heroes in Valhal live.
Sad. a name of Odin.
Saga. The goddess of history.
Sager. The bucket carried by Bil and Hjuke.
Sangetal. a name of Odin.
Sekin. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Sessrymner. Freyja's palace.
SiAR. A dwarf.
Sid. a stream flowing from Hvergelmer.
Sidhot. a name of Odin.
Sidskeg. a name of Odin.
Sip. Thor's wife.

Sigpather. a name of Odin.
Sigfrid. The hero in the Niblung story; the same as Sigurd.
SiGMUND. Son of Volsung. Also son of Sigurd and Gudrun.
SiNDRE. A dwarf.
Sigtyr. a name of Odin.
SiGYN. Loke's wife.



VOCABULARY. 287

Sigurd. The hero in the Niblung story; identical with Sigfrid.
SiLVERTOP. One of the horses of the gods.
SiMUL. The pole on which Bil aad Hjuke carried the bucket.

SiNFJOTLE. Son of SigmUnd.
SiNER. One of the horses of the gods.
Sjopn. One of the asynjes.
Skade. a giantess; daughter of Thjasse and wife of Njord.
Skeggold. a Valkyrie.
Skeidbrimer. One of the horses of the gods.
Skidbladner. Frey's ship.
Skifid. a dwarf.
Skifir. a dwarf.
Skilfing. a name of Odin.
Skinpaxe. The horse of Day.
Skirner. Frey's messenger.
Skogul. a valkyrie.
Skol. The wolf that pursues the sun.
Skrymer. The name assumed by Utgard-Loke; a giant.
Skuld. The norn of the future.
Sleipner. Odin's eight-footed steed.

Slid. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Slidrugtanne. Frey's boar.
Snotra. One of the asynjes.
SoKMiMER. A giant slain by Odin.
SoKVABEK. A mansion, where Odin and Saga quaff from golden

beakers.

Sol. Daughter of Mundilfare.

Son. One of the vessels containing the poetic mead.
SoRLE. Son of Jonaker and Gudrun; avenges the death of Svanhild.

SuDRE. A dwarf.
Sun. Identical with Sol.

SuRT. Guards Muspelheim. A fire-giant in Ragnarok.
SuTTUNGo The giant possessing the poetic mead.
SvADE. A giant.
SvADiLPARE. A horse, the sire of Sleipner.
SvAPNER. A serpent under Ygdrasil.
Svanhild. Daughter of Sigurd and Gudrun.
SvARiN. A dwarf.
SvARTALPAHEiM. The homo of the swarthy elves.
SvARTHOFDE. The auccstor of all enchanters.
SvASUD. The name of a giant; father of summer.



288 vocabVlary.

SviAGRis. A ring demanded by the berserks for Rolf Krake.
SviD. A name of Odin.
SviDAR. A name of Odin.
SviDR. A name of Odin.
SviDRE. A name of Odin.
SviDRiR. A name of Odin.
SviDUR. A name of Odin.
SviPDAG. The betrothed of Menglad.
SviPOL. A name of Odin.
SvoL. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
SvOLNE. A name of Odin.
Sylg. a stream flowing from Hvergelmer.
Syn. a minor goddess.
Syr. a name of Freyja.
Tangnjost. )

t,, ,
.

Tangrisner.[
Thors goats.

Thek. a dwarf; also a name of Odin.
Thjalfe. The name of Thor's man-servant.
Thjasse. a giant; the father of Njord's wife, Skade.
Thjodnuma. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Thok. Loke in the disguise of a woman.
Thol. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Thor. Son of Odin and Fjorgyn. The god of thunder.

Thorin. a dwarf.
Thorn. A giant.
Thride. a name of Odin.
Thro. A dwarf; also a name of Odin.
Throin. a dwarf.
Thror. a name of Odin.
Thrud. a valkyrie.
Thud. A name of Odin.
Thul. a stream flowing from Hvergelmer.
Thund. a name of Odin.
Thvite. a stone used in chaining the Fenris-wolf.
Thyn. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Tyr. The one-armed god of war.
Ud. a name of Odin.
Ukko. The god of thunder in Tshudic mythology.
Ukko-Thor. a name for Thor.
Uller. Son of Sif and step-son of Thor.

Urd. The norn of the past.



VOCABULARY. 289

XJtgarDo The abode of the giant Utgard-Loke.
Utgard-Loke. a giant visited by Thor; identical with Skrymer.
Vafthrudner. a giant visited by Odin.
Vafud. a name of Odin.
Vafurt^oge. The bickering flame surrounding Brynhild on Hind-

fell.

Vak. a name of Odin.
Valaskjalf. One of Odin's dwellings.
Vale. Brother of Balder; kills Hoder.

Valpather. a name of Odin.
Valhal. The hall to which Odin invites those slain in battle.
Vanadis, a name of Freyja.
Vanaheim. The home of the vans.
Var. The goddess of betrothals and marriages.
Vartare. The thread with which the mouth of Loke was sewed

together.

Vasad. The grandfather of Winter.
Ye. a brother of Odin. (Odin, Vile and Ve).
Vedfolner. a hawk in Ygdrasil.
Vegsvin. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Vegtam. a name of Odin.
Veratyr. a name of Odin.
Verdande. The norn of the present.
Vestre. a dwarf.
ViD. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
ViDAR. Son of Odin and the giantess Grid.

ViDBLAiN. The third heaven.
ViDFiN. The father of Bil and Hjuke.
ViDOLF. The ancestor of the valas.
ViDRER. A name of Odin.
ViDUR. A name of Odin.
ViG. A dwarf.
ViGRiD. The field of battle where the gods and the hosts of Surt

meet in Ragnarok.
Vile. Brother of Odin and Ve.

ViLMEiDE. The ancestor of all wizards.
ViMER. A river that Thor crosses.
ViN. A river that flows from Hvergelmer.
Vina. A river that flows from Hvergelmer.
ViNDALF. A dwarf.
ViNDLONG. One of the names of the father of winter.



290 VOCABULARY.

ViNDSVAL. One of the names of the father of winter.

ViNGNER. A name of Thor.
ViNGOLF. The palace of the asynjes.
ViNGTHOR. A name of Thor.
ViRFiR. A dwarf.
YiT. A dwarf.
VoLSUNGS. The descendants of Volsung.
Von. a river formed by the saliva running from the mouth of the

chained Fenris-wolf.

VoR. One of the asynjes.
WoDAN. A name of Odin.
Ydaler. Tiller's dwelling.
Yg. a name of Odin.
Ygdrasil. The world-embracing ash-tree.
Ylg. One of the streams flowing from Hvergelmer.
Ymer. The huge giant out of whose body the world was created.
