   CHAPTER I.
   How the Lion, King of all Beasts, sent out his commandments that all Beasts should come to his feast and Court.
     IT was about the time of Pentecost or Whitsuntide, that the woods commonly be lusty and gladsome, and the trees clad with leaves and blossoms, and the ground with herbs and flowers sweet smelling, and also the fowls and birds singing melodiously in their harmony, that the Lion, the noble King of all Beasts, would in the holy days of this feast hold an open Court at state; which he did to know 6 over all in his land, and commanded by straight commissions and commandments that every Beast should come thither, in such wise that all the Beasts great and small came to the Court save Reynart the Fox: for he knew himself faulty and guilty in many things against many Beasts that thither should comen, that he durst not adventure to go thither. When the King of all Beasts had assembled all his Court, there was none of them all but that he had complained sore on Reynart the Fox.
   CHAPTER II.
   The first complaint made Isegrim the Wolf on Reynart.
     ISEGRIM the Wolf, with his lineage and friends, came and stood before the King, and said, “High and Mighty Prince, my Lord the King, I beseech you that through your great might, right, and mercy, that ye will have pity on the great trespass and the unreasonable misdeeds that Reynart the Fox hath done to me and to my wife: that is to wit, he is comen in to my house against the will of my wife, and there he hath bepissed my children whereas they lay, in such wise as they thereof ben waxen blind. Whereupon was a day set, and was judged that Reynart should come and have excused him hereof, and have sworn on the holy saints that he was not guilty thereof. And [45] when the book with the saints was brought forth, tho 7 had Reynart bethought him otherwise, and went his way again into his hole, as he had naught set thereby. And, dear King, this knowen well many of the Beasts that now be comen hither to your Court. And yet hath he trespassed to me in many other things. He is not living that could tell all that I now leave untold. But the shame and villainy that he hath done my wife, that shall I never hide ne suffer it unavenged, but that he shall make to me large amends.
   CHAPTER III.
   The complaint of Courtoys the Hound.
     WHEN these words were spoken, so stood there a little Hound and was named Courtoys, and complained to the King, how that in the cold winter in the hard frost he had ben sore forwintered, in such wise as he had kept no more meat than a pudding, which pudding Reynart the Fox had taken away from him.
   Tho spake Tybert the Cat.
     WITH this so came Tybert the Cat, with an irous 8 mood, and sprang in among them, and said: “My Lord the King, I here hear that Reynart is sore complained on, and here is none but that he hath enough to do to clear himself. That Courtoys here complaineth of, that is passed many years gone, howbeit, that I complain not; that pudding was mine, for I had won it by night in a mill. The miller lay and slept. If Courtoys had any part hereon, that came by me too.”
     Tho spake Panther, “Think ye, Tybert, that it were good that Reynart should not be complained on? He is a very murderer, a rover, and a thief, he loveth no man so well, not our Lord the King here, but that he well would that he should lose good and worship, so that he might win as much as a leg of a fat hen. I shall tell you what I saw him do yesterday to Cuwart the Hare, that here standeth in the King’s peace and safeguard. He promised [46] to Cuwart and said he would teach him his Credo, and make him a good chaplain. He made him go sit between his legs, and sang and cried loud, ‘Credo, Credo!’ My way lay thereby there that I heard this song. Tho went I near and found Master Reynart that had left that he first read and sang, and began to play his old play. For he had caught Cuwart by the throat, and had I not that time comen he should have taken his life from him, like as ye here may see on Cuwart the Hare the fresh wound yet. Forsooth, my Lord the King, if ye suffer this unpunished, and let him go quit that hath thus broken your peace, and will do no right after the sentence and judgment of your men, your children many years hereafter shall be misprised and blamed therefor.”
     “Sikerly, Panther,” said Isegrim, “ye say truth. It were good that right and justice were done, for them that would fain live in peace.”
   CHAPTER IV.
   How Grymbart the Dasse 9 the Fox’s sister’s son spake for Reynart and answered tofore the King.
     THEN spake Grymbart the Dasse, and was Reynart’s sister’s son, with an angry mood.
     “Sir Isegrim that is evil said. It is a common proverb an enemy’s mouth saith seld well. What lie ye and wite 10 ye mine Eme11 Reynart? I would that ye would adventure that who of you twain had most trespassed to other should hang by the neck as a thief on a tree. But and if he were as well in this court and as well with the King as ye be, it should not be thought in him that it were enow that ye should come and ask him forgiveness; ye have bitten and nipped mine uncle with your fell and sharp teeth many more times than I can tell. Yet will I tell some points that I well know. Know not ye how ye misdealed on the plaice which he threw down from the car, when ye followed after from afar, and ye ate the good plaice alone, and gave him no more than the grate or bones which ye might not eat yourself. In like [47] wise did ye to him also of the fat flitch of bacon which savoured so well that ye alone ate it in your belly, and when mine Eme asked his part tho answered ye him again in scorn, ‘Reynart, fair youngling, I shall gladly give you your part’—but mine Eme gat ne had nought, ne was not the better. Notwithstanding he had won the flitch of bacon with great dread, for the man came and threw him in a sack that he scarcely came out with his life. Such manner things hath Reynart many times suffered through Isegrim. O ye lordes, think ye that this is good ? Yet is there more. He complaineth how that Reynart mine Eme hath much trespassed to him by cause of his wife. Mine Eme hath lain by her, but that is well seven years tofore, ere he wedded her; and if Reynart for love and courtesy did with her his will, what was that? She was soon healed thereof. Hereof by right should be no complaint, were Isegrim wise. He should have believed that he doth to himself no worship thus to slander his wife. She plaineth not. Now maketh Cuwart the Hare a complaint also. That thinketh me a vyseuase.12 If he read ne learned aright his lesson, should not Reynart his master beat him therefor? If the scholars were not beaten ne smitten and reprised 13 of their truantry, they should never learn. Now complaineth Courtoys that he with pain had gotten a pudding in the winter, at such time as the cost 14 is evil to find. Thereof him had be better to have held his peace, for he had stolen it. Male quæsisti et male perdidisti. It is right that it be evil lost that is evil won. Who shall blame Reynart if he have taken from a thief stolen good. It is reason. Who that understandeth the law, and can discern the right, and that he be of high birth as mine Eme Reynart is, knoweth well how he shall resseyue stolen good. Yet all had he Courtoys hanged when he found him with the menour 15 he had not much misdone nor trespassed, save against the Crown, that he had done justice without leave. Wherefore for the honour of the King he did it not, all hath he but little thanks. What scathed it him that he is thus complained [48] on? Mine Eme is a gentle and true man. He may suffer no falsehood. He doth nothing but by his priest’s counsel. And I say you, sith that my lord the King hath do proclaim16 his peace, he never thought to hurt any man; for he eateth no more than once a day; he liveth as a recluse; he chastiseth his body, and weareth a shirt of hair; it is more than a year that he hath eaten no flesh. As I yesterday heard say of them that came from him he hath left and given over his Castle Maleperduys and hath builded a cluse; therein dwelleth he and hunteth no more ne desireth no winning, but he liveth by alms and taketh nothing but such as men give him for charity, and doth great penance for his sins, and he is waxen much pale and lean of praying and waking, for he would be fain with God.”
     Thus as Grymbart his Eme stood and preached these words, so saw they coming down the hill to them Chanticleer the Cock and brought on a bier a dead hen of whom Reynart had bitten the head off, and that must be showed to the King for to have knowledge thereof.
   CHAPTER V.
   How the Cock complained on Reynart.
     CHANTICLEER came forth and smote piteously his hands and his feathers; and on each side of the bier wenten tweyne sorrowful hens, that one was called Cantart and that other good hen Crayant, they were two the fairest hens that were between Holland and Arderne. These hens bare each of them a burning taper which was long and straight. These two hens were Coppen’s sisters, and they cried so piteously “Alas and weleaway” for the death of their dear sister Coppen. Two young hens bare the bier, which cackled so heavily and wept so loud for the death of Coppen their mother, that it was very hard. Thus came they together tofore the King.
     And Chanticleer tho said, “Merciful lord, my lord the King, please it you to hear our complaint and abhor the great scathe [49] that Reynart hath done to me and my children that here stand. It was so that in the beginning of April, when the weather is fair, as that I, as hardy and proud because of the great lineage that I am come of and also had, for I had eight fair sons and seven fair daughters which my wife had hatched, and they were all strong and fat, and went in a yard which was walled round about, in which was a shed wherein were six great dogs which had totore and plucked many a beast’s skin in such wise as my children were not afraid. On whom Reynart the thief had great envy because they were so sure that he could none get of them; how well ofttimes hath this fell thief gone round about this wall and hath laid for us in such wise that the dogs have be set on him and have hunted him away; and once they leapt on him upon the bank, and that cost him somewhat for his theft, I saw that his skin smoked. Nevertheless he went his way. God amend it!
     “Thus were we quit of Reynart a long while. At last came he in likeness of an hermit, and brought to me a letter for to read, sealed with the King’s seal, in which stood written that the King had made peace over all in his realm, and that all manner beasts and fowls should do none harm nor scathe to any other. Yet said he to me more that he was a cloisterer or a closed recluse becomen, and that he would receive great penance for his sins. He showed me his slavyne and pylche 17 and an hairen shirt thereunder, and then said he, 'Sir Chanticleer after this time be no more afraid of me, ne take no heed, for I now will eat no more flesh. I am forthon so old that I would fain remember my soul. I will now go forth, for I have yet to say my sexte, none, and mine evensong. To God I betake 18 you.” Tho went Reynart thence, saying his Credo, and laid him under an hawthorn. Then I was glad and merry, and also took none heed, and went to my children and clucked them together, and went without the wall for to walk; whereof is much harm comen to us, for Reynart lay under a bush and came creeping between us and the gate, so that he caught one of my children and laid him in his male.19 [56] Whereof we have great harm, for sith he hath tasted of him there might never hunter ne hound save ne keep him from us. He hath waited by night and day in such wise that he hath stolen so many of my children that of fifteen I have but four, in such wise hath this thief forslongen 20 them. And yet yesterday was Coppen my daughter, that here lieth upon the bier, with the hounds rescued. This complain I to you, gracious King, have pity on mine great and unreasonable damage and loss of my fair children!”
   CHAPTER VI.
   How the King spake touching this complaint.
     THEN spake the King:
     “Sir Dasse, hear ye this well of the recluse of your Eme? He hath fasted and prayed, that if I live a year he shall abye21 it. Now hark, Chanticleer, your plaint is enough. Your daughter that lieth here dead, we will give to her the death’s rite. We may keep her no longer, we will betake her to God. We will sing her vigil and bring her worshipfully on earth, and then we will speak with these lords and take counsel how we may do right and justice of this great murder, and bring this false thief to the law.”
     Tho began they Placebo domino, with the verses that to longen,22 which if I should say were me too long. When this vigil was done and the commendation, she was laid in the pit, and there upon her was laid a marble stone polished as clear as any glass, and thereon was hewen in great letters in this wise: COPPE CHANTEKLERS DOUGHTER, WHOM REYNART THE FOX HATH BYTEN, LYETH HIER VNDER BURYED, COMPLAYNE YE HER FFOR, SHE IS SHAMEFULLY COMEN TO HER DETH.
     After this, the King sent for his lords and the wisest of his council for to take advice how this great murder and trespass should be punished on Reynart the Fox. There was concluded [51] and appointed for the best that Reynart should be sent for, and that he left not for any cause, but he came into the King's court for to hear what should be said to him; and that Bruin the Bear should do the message.
     The King thought that all this was good and said to Bruin the Bear, “Sir Bruin, I will that ye do this message; but see well to for yourself, for Reynart is a shrew, and fell,23 and knoweth so many wiles that he shall lie and flatter, and shall think how he may beguile, deceive, and bring you to some mockery.”
     Then said Bruin, “What, good lord, let it alone! Deceiveth me the Fox, so have I ill learned my casus. I trow he shall come too late to mock me.” Thus departed Bruin merrily from thence, but it is to dread that he came not so merrily again.
   CHAPTER VII.
   How Bruin the Bear was sped of Reynart the Fox.
     NOW is Bruin gone on his way toward the Fox with a stout mood, which supposed well that the Fox should not have beguiled him. As he came in a dark wood in a forest whereas Reynart had a bypath when he was hunted, there beside was an high mountain and land, and there must Bruin in the middle goon over for to go to Maleperduys. For Reynart had many a dwelling-place, but the Castle of Maleperduys was the best and the fastest burgh that he had. There lay he in when he had need, and was in any dread or fear. Now when Bruin was comen to Maleperduys, he found the gate fast shut. Tho went he tofore the gate, and sat upon his tail, and called, “Reynart, be ye at home? I am Browning. The King hath sent me for you that you should come to Court, for to plead your cause. He hath sworn there by his God, come ye not, or bring I you not with me, for to abide such right and sentence as shall be there given, it shall cost you your life. He will hang you or set you on the rack. Reynart, do by my counsel, and come to the Court.” [52]
     Reynart lay within the gate, as he oft was wont to do, for the warmth of the sun. When Reynart heard Bruin, tho went he inward into his hole. For Maleperduys was full of holes, here one hole and there another, and yonder another, narrow, crooked and long, with many ways to go out, which he opened and shut after that he had need. When he had any prey brought home, or that he wist that any sought him for his misdeeds and trespasses, then he ran and hid him from his enemies into his secret chambers, that they could not find him; by which he deceived many a beast that sought him. And tho thought Reynard in himself how he might best bring the Bear in charge and need, and that he abode in worship.
     In this thought Reynart came out, and said, “Bruin, Eme, ye be welcome! I heard you well tofore, but I was in mine evensong, therefore have I the longer tarried a little. Dear Eme, he hath done to you no good service, and I con him no thank,24 that hath sent you over this long hill; for I see that ye be also weary, that the sweat runneth down by your cheeks. It was no need I had nevertheless comen to Court to-morrow: but I sorrow now the less, for your wise counsel shall well help me in the Court. And could the King find none less messenger but you for to send hither? That is great wonder. For next the King ye be the most gentle, and richest of levies and of land. I would well that we were now at the Court, but I fear me that I shall not con well go thither, for I have eaten so much new meat that me thinketh my belly will break or cleave asunder, and because the meat was new I ate the more.”
     Tho spake the Bear, “Lief Neve,25 what meat have ye eaten that maked you so full?”
     “Dear Eme, that I ate, what might it help you that if I told you? I ate but simple meat. A poor man is no lord, that may ye know, Eme, by me. We poor folk must eat ofttimes such as we gladly would not eat if we had better. They were great honey [53] combs; which I must needs eat for hunger. They have made my belly so great that I can nowhere endure.”
     Bruin then spake anon, “Alas, Reynart, what say ye! Set ye so little by honey? Me ought to prize and love it above all meat. Lief Reynart, help me that I might get a deal of this honey, and as long as I live I shall be to you a true friend, and abide by you, as far as ye help me that I may have a part of this honey.
   CHAPTER VIII.
   How Bruin ate the honey.
     BRUIN, Eme, I had supposed that ye had japed 26 therewith.”
     “So help me God, Reynart, nay. I should not gladly jape with you.”
     Then spake the red Reynart, “Is it then earnest, that ye love so well the honey? I shall do let you have so much that ten of you should not eat it at one meal, might I get therewith your friendship.”
     “Not we ten, Reynart Neve!” said the Bear. “How should that be? Had I all the honey that is between this and Portugal I should well eat it alone.”
     Reynart said, “What say ye, Eme? Hereby dwelleth an husbandman named Lantfert, which hath so much honey that ye should not eat in seven years; which ye shall have in your hold if ye will be to me friendly and helping against mine enemies in the King’s Court.”
     Then promised Bruin the Bear to him, that if he might have his belly full he would truly be to him tofore all other a faithful friend.
     Hereof laughed Reynart the shrew,27 and said, “If ye would have seven hamper barrels full I shall well get them and help you to have them.” These words pleased the Bear so well, and made him so much to laugh that he could not well stand.
     Tho thought Reynart, “This is good luck; I shall lead him thither that he shall laugh by measure.” [54]
     Reynart said then, “This matter may not be long tarried. I must pain myself for you. Ye shall well understand the very yonste28 and good will that I bear to you ward. I know none in all my lineage that I now would labour for thus sore.”
     That thanked him the Bear and thought he tarried long.
     “Now, Eme, let us go a good pace, and follow ye me. I shall make you to have as much honey as ye may bear.” The Fox meant, of good strokes; but the caitiff marked not what the Fox meant; and they went so long together, that they came unto Lantfert’s yard. Tho was sir Bruin merry.
     Now hark of Lantfert. Is it true that men say, so was Lantfert a strong carpenter of great timber, and had brought that other day tofore into his yard a great oak, which he had begun to cleave. And as men be woned 29 he had smitten two betels 30 therein one after that other, in such wise the oak was wide open. Whereof Reynart was glad, for he had found it right as he wished, and said to the Bear all laughing, “See now well sharply to! In this tree is so much honey that it is without measure. Assay if ye can come therein, and eat but little, for though the honeycombs be sweet and good, yet beware that ye eat not too many, but take of them by measure, that ye catch no harm in your body; for, sweet Eme, I should be blamed if they did you any harm.”
     “What, Reynart, cousin, sorrow ye not for me! Ween ye that I were a fool?”
     “Measure is good in all meat,” Reynart said. “Ye say truth. Wherefore should I sorrow? Go to the end and creep therein.”
     Bruin the Bear hasted sore toward the honey, and trode in with his two foremost feet, and put his head over his ears into the clift of the tree. And Reynart sprang lightly and brake out the betle of the tree. Tho helped the Bear neither flattering ne chiding; he was fast shut in the tree. Thus hath the Neve, with deceit, brought his Eme in prison in the tree, in such wise as he could not get out with might ne with craft, head ne foot. [55]
     What profiteth Bruin the Bear that he strong and hardy is? That may not help him. He saw well that he was beguiled. He began to howl, and to bray, and crutched with the hinder feet, and made such a noise and rumour, that Lantfert came out hastily, and knew nothing what this might be, and brought in his hand a sharp hook. Bruin the Bear lay in the clift of the tree, in great fear and dread, and held fast his head, and nipped both his fore feet. He wrang, he wrestled, and cried, and all was for naught. He wist not how he might get out.
     Reynart the Fox saw from far how that Lantfert the carpenter came, and tho spake Reynart to the Bear, “Is that honey good? How is it now? Eat not too much, it should do you harm; ye should not then well con go to the Court. When Lantfert cometh, if ye have well eaten he shall give you better to drink, and then it shall not stick in your throat.”
     After these words tho turned him Reynart toward his castle, and Lantfert came and found the Bear fast taken in the tree. Then ran he fast to his neighbours and said “Come all in to my yard, there is a bear taken!” The word anon sprang over all in the thorp. There ne bleef 31 neither man ne wife, but all ran thither as fast as they could, every one with his weapon, some with a staff, some with a rake, some with a broom, some with a stake of the hedge, and some with a flail; and the priest of the church had the staff of the cross, and the clerk brought a vane. The priest’s wife Julocke came with her distaff,—she sat tho and span,—there came old women that for age had not one tooth in their head.
     Now was Bruin the Bear nigh much sorrow that he alone must stand against them all. When he heard all this great noise and cry he wrestled and plucked so hard and so sore that he gat out his head. But he left behind all the skin and both his ears, in such wise that never man saw fouler ne loather beast, for the blood ran over his eyes. And or he could get out his feet he must lete 32 there his claws or nails and this rough hand. This market came to him evil, for he supposed never to have gone, his [56] feet were so sore, and he might not see for the blood which ran so over his eyes.
     Lantfert came to him with the priest, and forthwith all the parish, and began to smite and strike sore upon his head and visage. He received there many a sore stroke. Every man beware hereby: who hath harm and scathe, every man will be thereat and put more to. That was well seen on the Bear, for they were all fierce and wroth on the Bear, great and small, yea Hughelyn with the crooked leg, and Ludolf with the broad long nose, they were both wroth. That one had a leaden malle, and that other a great leaden wapper, therewith they wappred and all forslingred 33 him, Sir Bertolt with the long fingers, Lantfert, and Ottram the long. This did to the Bear more harm than all the other, that one had a sharp hook and the other a crooked staff well leaded on the end for to play at the ball. Baetkyn and Aue, Abelquak, my dame Baue, and the priest with his staff, and dame Julocke his wife, these wroughten to the Bear so much harm that they would fain have brought him from his life to death, they smote and stack him all that they could.
     Bruin the Bear sat and sighed and groaned, and must take such as was given to him. But Lantfert was the worthiest of birth of them all, and made most noise; for dame Pogge of Chafporte was his mother, and his father was Macob the stoppelmaker, a much stout man. There as he was alone Bruin received of them many a cast of stones. Tofore them all sprang first Lantfert’s brother with a staff, and smote the Bear on the head that he ne heard ne saw; and therewith the Bear sprang up between the bush and the river among a heap of wives, that he threw a deal of them in the river, which was wide and deep.
     There was the parson’s wife one of them, wherefore he was full of sorrow when he saw his wife lie in the water. He lusted no longer to smite the Bear, but called, “Dame Julocke in the water! Now every man see to, All they that may help her! [57] Be they men or women, I give to them all pardon of their penance, and release all their sins!” All they then left Bruin the Bear lie, and did that the priest bade.
     When Bruin the Bear saw that they ran all from him, and ran to save the women, tho sprang he into the water and swam all that he could. Then made the priest a great shout and noise, and ran after the Bear with great anger, and said, “Come and turn again, thou false thief!” The Bear swam after the best of the stream and let them call and cry, for he was glad that he was so escaped from them. He cursed and banned the honey tree, and the Fox also that had so betrayed him that he had crept therein so deep that he lost both his hood and his ears. And so forth he drove in the stream well a two or three mile. Tho wax he so weary that he went to land for to sit and rest him, for he was heavy; he groaned and sighed, and the blood leapt over his eyes, he drew his breath like as one should have died.
     Now hark how the Fox did. Ere he came from Lantfert’s house he had stolen a fat hen and had laid her in his male, and ran hastily away by a bye path where he weened that no man should have comen. He ran toward the river, that he sweat, he was so glad that he wist not what to do for joy, for he hoped that the Bear had been dead. He said, “I have now well sped, for he that should most have hindered me in the Court is now dead, and none shall wite34 me thereof, may I not, then, by right be well glad?” With these words the Fox looked to the riverward, and espied where Bruin the Bear lay and rested him. Tho was the Fox sorrier and heavier than tofore was merry, and was as angry, and said in chiding to Lantfert, “Alas, Lantfert, lewd fool! God give him a shames death that hath lost such good venison, which is good and fat, and hath let him go which was taken to his hand! Many a man would gladly have eaten of him. He hath lost a rich and fat Bear.” Thus all chiding he came to the river, where he found the Bear sore wounded, bebled, and right sick, which he might thank none better thereof than Reynart, which he spake to the Bear in scorn: [58] “Chiere priestre, Dieu vous garde! Will ye see the red thief?”
     Said the Bear to himself, “The ribaud and the fell deer,35 here I see him coming.”
     Then said the Fox, “Have ye aught forgotten at Lantfert’s? Have ye also paid him for the honeycombs that ye stole from him? If ye have not, it were a great shame, and not honest; I will rather be the messenger myself for to go and pay him. Was the honey not good? I know yet more of the same prize. Dear Eme, tell me ere I go hence into what order will ye go that wear this new hood? Were ye a monk or an abbot? He that shaved your crown hath nipped off your ears, ye have lost your top and don off your gloves, I trow verily that ye will go sing compline.”
     All this heard Bruin the Bear, and waxed all angry, and sorry for he might not avenge him. He let the Fox say his will, and with great pain suffered it, and start again in the river, and swam down with the stream to that other side.
     Now must he sorrow how that he should come to the Court, for he had lost his ears and the skin with the claws of his forefeet; for though a man should have slain him he could not go; and yet he must needs forth, but he wist not how.
     Now hear how he did. He sat upon his hams and began to rustle over his tail; and when he was so weary, he wentled 36 and tumbled nigh half a mile; this did he with great pain so long till at last he came to the Court. And when he was seen so coming from far, some doubted what it might be that came so wenteling.
     The King at last knew him, and was not well paid,37 and said, “This is Bruin the Bear, my friend! Lord God, who hath wounded him thus? He is passing red on his head: me thinketh he is hurt unto the death. Where may he have been?”
     Therewith is the Bear came tofore the king, and said: [59]
   CHAPTER IX.
   The complaint of the Bear upon the Fox.
     “I COMPLAIN to you, merciful lord, sir King, so as ye may see how that I am handled, praying you to avenge it upon Reynart the fell beast; for I have gotten this in your service. I have lost both my foremost feet, my cheeks, and mine ears, by his false deceit and treason.”
     The King said, “How durst this false thief Reynart do this? I say to you, Bruin, and swear by my crown, I shall so avenge you on him that ye shall con me thank!”
     He sent for all the wise beasts and desired counsel how that he might avenge this over-great wrong that the Fox had done. Then the council concluded, old and young, that he should be sent for, and dayed 38 earnestly again, for to abide such judgment as should there be given on him of all his trespasses. And they thought that the cat Tybert might best do this message if he would, for he is right wise. The King thought this counsel good.