CHAPTER XXI.
   How the Fox sent the head of Cuwart the Hare to the King by
   Bellyn the Ram.
     THE Fox said, “Bellyn, remember ye not that yesterday the King and his council commanded me that ere I should depart out of this land I should send to him two letters? Dear cousin, I pray you to bear them, they be ready written.”
     The Ram said, “I wot never. If I wist that your inditing and writing were good, ye might peradventure so much pray me that I would bear them, if I had anything to bear them in.”
     Reynart said, “Ye shall not fail to have somewhat to bear them in. Rather than they should be unborne I shall rather give you my male that I bear; and put the King’s letters therein, and hang them about your neck. Ye shall have of the King great thanks therefor, and be right welcomen to him.”
     Hereupon Bellyn promised him to bear these letters.
     Tho returned Reynart into his house and took the male and [94] put therein Cuwart’s head, and brought it to Bellyn for to bring him in danger, and hang it on his neck, and charged him not to look in the male if he would have the King’s friendship. “And if ye will that the King take you into his grace and love you, say that ye yourself have made the letter and indited it, and have given the counsel that it is so well made and written. Ye shall have great thanks therefor.”
     Bellyn the Ram was glad hereof, and thought he should have great thanks, and said, “Reynart, I wot well that ye now do for me. I shall be in the Court greatly praised when it is known that I can indite and make a letter, though I cannot make it. Ofttimes it happeneth that God suffereth some to have worship and thank of the labours and cunning of other men, and so it shall befall me now. Now, what counsel ye, Reynart? Shall Cuwart the Hare come with me to the Court?”
     “Nay,” said the Fox, “he shall anon follow you. He may not yet come, for he must speak with his Aunt. Now go ye forth tofore. I shall show to Cuwart secret things which ben not yet known.”
     Bellyn said, “Farewell, Reynart,” and went him forth to the Court. And he ran and hasted so fast, that he came tofore midday to the Court, and found the King in his palace with his Barons. The King marvelled when he saw him bring the male again which was made of the Bear’s skin. The King said, “Say on, Bellyn, from whence come ye? Where is the Fox? How is it that he hath not the male with him?”
     Bellyn said, “My Lord, I shall say you all that I know. I accompanied Reynart unto his house. And when he was ready, he asked me if I that would for your sake bear two letters to you. I said, for to do you pleasure and worship, I would gladly bear to you seven. Tho brought he to me this male wherein the letters be, which ben indited by my cunning, and I gave counsel of the making of them. I trow ye saw never letters better ne craftlier made ne indited.”
     The King commanded anon Bokart, his secretary, to read the letters, for he understood all manner languages. Tybert the Cat [95] and he took the male off Bellyn’s neck, and Bellyn hath so far said and confessed that he therefore was dampned.78
     The clerk Bokwart undid the male, and drew out Cuwart’s head, and said, “Alas, what letters ben these! Certainly, my Lord, this is Cuwart’s head.”
     “Alas,” said the King, “that ever I believed so the Fox!” There might men see great heaviness of the King and of the Queen. The King was so angry that he held long down his head, and at last, after many thoughts, he made a great cry, that all the beasts were afraid of the noise.
     Tho spake Sir Firapeel the Leopard, which was sybbe 79 somewhat to the King, and said, “Sire King, how make ye such a noise! Ye make sorrow enough though the Queen were dead. Let this sorrow go, and make good cheer. It is great shame. Be ye not a Lord and King of this land? Is it not all under you, that here is?”
     The King said, “Sir Firapeel, how should I suffer this? One false shrew and deceiver has betrayed me and brought me so far, that I have forwrought 80 and angered my friends the stout Bruin the Bear and Isegrim the Wolf, which sore me repenteth. And this goeth against my worship, that I have done amiss against my best Barons, and that I trusted and believed so much the false Fox. And my wife is cause thereof. She prayed me so much that I heard her prayer, and that me repenteth, though it be too late.”
     “What though, Sir King,” said the Leopard. “If there be any thing misdone it shall be amended. We shall give to Bruin the Bear to Isegrim the Wolf and to Ersewynde his wife for the piece of his skin and for their shoes, for to have good peace, Bellyn the Ram. For he hath confessed himself that he gave counsel and consented to Cuward’s death. It is reason that he abye it. And we all shall go fetch Reynart, and we shall arrest him and hang him by the neck, without law or judgment. And there with all shall be content.” [96]
   CHAPTER XXII.
   How Bellyn the Ram and all his lineage were given in the hands of Isegrim and Bruin, and how he was slain.
     THE King said, “I will do it gladly.”
     Firapeel the Leopard went tho to the prison and unbound them first, and then he said, “Ye, sirs, I bring to you a fast pardon and my lord’s love and friendship. It repenteth him, and is sorry, that he ever hath done spoken or trespassed against you, and therefore ye shall have a good appointment. And also amends he shall give to you, Bellyn the Ram and all his lineage fro now forthon to doomsday, in such wise that wheresomever ye find them, in field or in wood, that ye may freely bite and eat them without any forfeit. And also the King granteth to you that ye may hunt and do the worst ye can to Reynart and all his lineage without misdoing. This fair great privilege will the King grant to you ever to hold of him. And the King will that ye swear to him never to misdo, but do him homage and fealty. I counsel you to do this, for ye may do it honourably.”
     Thus was the peace made by Firapeel the Leopard, friendly and well. And that cost Bellyn the Ram his tabart 81 and also his life, and the Wolf’s lineage hold these privileges of the King. And in to this day they devour and eat Bellyn’s lineage where that they may find them. This debate was begun in an evil time, for the peace could never sith 82 be made between them.
     The King did forth with his Court and feast length twelve days longer for love of the Bear and the Wolf, so glad was he of the making of this peace.
   CHAPTER XXIII.
   How the King held his feast, and how Lapreel the Cony complained unto the King upon Reynart the Fox.
     TO this great feast came all manner of beasts, for the King did do cry this feast over all in that land. There was the most joy and [97] mirth that ever was seen among beasts. There was danced mannerly the hovedance,83 with shalms, trumpets, and all manner of minstrelsy. The King did do ordain so much meat that everych found enough. And there was no beast in all his land so great ne so little but he was there, and there were many fowls and birds also, and all they that desired the King’s friendship were there, saving Reynart the Fox, the red false pilgrim which lay in await to do harm and thought it was not good for him to be there. Meat and drink flowed there. There were plays and esbatemens. The feast was full of melody. One might have lust to see such a feast.
     And right as the feast had dured eight days, about mid-day came in the Cony Lapreel tofore the King, where he sat on the table with the Queen, and said all heavily that all they heard him that were there, “My lord, have pity on my complaint, which is of great force and murder that Reynart the Fox would have done to me yester morrow as I came running by his borugh at Maleperduys. He stood before his door without, like a pilgrim. I supposed to have passed by him peaceably toward this feast, and when he saw me come he came against me saying his beads. I saluted him, but he spake not one word, but he raught out his right foot and dubbed me in the neck between mine ears that I had weened I should have lost my head, but God be thanked I was so light that I sprang from him. With much pain came I off his claws. He grimmed as he had been angry by cause he held me no faster. Tho I escaped from him I lost mine one ear, and I had four great holes in my head of his sharp nails that the blood sprang out and that I was nigh all aswoon, but for the great fear of my life I sprang and ran so fast from him that he could not overtake me. See, my Lord these great wounds that he hath made to me with his sharp long nails. I pray you to have pity of me, and that ye will punish this false traitor and murderer, or else shall there no man go and come over the heath in safety whiles he haunteth his false and shrewd rule.” [98]
   CHAPTER XXIV.
   How Corbant the Rook complained on the fox for the death of his wife.
     RIGHT as the Cony had made an end of his complaint, came in Corbant the Rook flowen in the place tofore the King and said, “Dear Lord, hear me. I bring you here a piteous complaint. I went to-day by the morrow 84 with Sharpebek my wife for to play upon the heath. And there lay Reynart the Fox down on the ground, like a dead caitiff. His eyes stared and his tongue hung long out of his mouth, like an hound had been dead. We tasted 85 and felt his belly but we found thereon no life. Tho went my wife and hearkened, and laid her ear tofore his mouth for to wit if he drew his breath, which misfell her evil: For the false fell Fox awaited well his time, and when he saw her so nigh him he caught her by the head and bit it off. The was I in great sorrow and cried loud,  ‘Alas! alas! what is there happened?’ Then stood he hastily up and raught so covetously after me that for fear of death I trembled, and flew upon a tree thereby, and saw from far how the false caitiff ate and slonked 86 her in, so hungrily that he left neither flesh ne bone, no more but a few feathers. The small feathers he slang them in with the flesh; he was so hungry, he would well have eaten twain. Tho went he his strete. Tho flew I down with great sorrow, and gathered up the feathers for to show them to you here. I would not be again in such peril and fear as I was there for a thousand mark of the finest gold that ever came of Araby. My Lord the King, see here this piteous work. This ben the feathers of Sharpebek my wife! My Lord, if ye will have worship ye must do herefor justice, and avenge you in such wise as men may fear and hold of you, for if ye suffer thus your safe conduct to be broken, ye yourself shall not go peaceably in the highway. For the lords that do not justice, and suffer that the law be not executed upon the [99] thieves, murderers, and them that misdo, they be partners tofore God of all their misdeeds and trespasses, and eueryche then will be a lord himself. Dear Lord see well to, for to keep yourself.”
   
   CHAPTER XXV.
   How the King was sore angry of these complaints.
     NOBLE the King was sore moved and angry when he had heard these complaints of the Cony and of the Rook. He was so frightful to look on that his eyen glimmered as fire; he brayed as loud as a bull, in such wise that all the Court quoke for fear; at the last he said, crying, “By my crown, and by the truth that I owe to my wife, I shall so awreak and avenge these trespasses that it shall be long spoken of after. That my safe conduct and my commandment is thus broken, I was over nice that I believed so lightly the false shrew. His false flattering speech deceived me. He told me he would go to Rome, and from thence over the sea to the Holy Land. I gave him male and psalter, and made of him a pilgrim, and meant all truth. Oh, what false touches can he! How can he stuff the sleeve with flocks! But this caused my wife. It was all by her counsel. I am not the first that have been deceived by women’s counsel, by which many a great hurt hath befallen. I pray and command all them that hold of me, and desire my friendship, be they here or wheresomever they be, that they with their counsel and deeds help me to avenge this over great trespass, that we and ours may abide in honour and worship and this false thief in shame. That he no more trespass against our safeguard, I will myself in my person help thereto all that I may.”
     Isegrim the Wolf and Bruin the Bear heard well the King’s words, and hoped well to be avenged on Reynart the Fox, but they durst not speak one word. The King was so sore moved that none durst well speak.
     At last the Queen spake, “Sire, pour dieu no croyes mye toutes choses que on vous dye, et ne Iures pas legierment. A man of [100] worship should not lightly believe, ne swear greatly, unto the time he knew the matter clearly; and also he ought by right hear that other party speak. There ben many that complain on other and ben in the default themself. Audi alteram partem: hear that other party. I have truly holden the Fox for good, and upon that that he meant no falsehood I helped him that I might. But howsomever it cometh or goeth, is he evil or good, me thinketh for your worship that ye should not proceed against him over hastily. That were not good ne honest, for he may not escape from you. Ye may prison him or flay him, he must obey your judgment.”
     Then said Firapeel the Leopard, “My Lord, me thinketh my Lady here hath said to you truth and given you good counsel; do ye well and follow her, and take advice of your wise council. And if he be founden guilty in the trespasses that now to you be showed, let him be sore punished according to his trespasses. And if he come not hither ere this feast be ended, and excuse him as he ought of right to do, then do as the council shall advise you. But and if he were twice as much false and ill as he is, I would not counsel that he should be done to more than right.”
     Isegrim the Wolf said, “Sir Firapeel, all we agree to the same; as far as it pleaseth my lord the King, it cannot be better. But though Reynart were now here, and he cleared him of double so many plaints, yet should I bring forth against him that he had forfeited his life. But I will now be still and say not, because he is not present. And yet, above all this, he hath told the King of certain treasure lying in Krekenpyt in Hulsterlo. There was never lied a greater leasing; therewith he hath us all beguiled, and hath sore hindered me and the Bear. I dare lay my life thereon that he said not thereof a true word. Now robbeth he and stealeth upon the heath all that goeth forth by his house. Nevertheless, Sir Firapeel, what that pleaseth the King and you that must well be done. But and if he would have comen hither he might have been here, for he had knowledge by the King's messenger.” [101]
     The King said, “We will none otherwise send for him, but I command all them that owe me service and will my honour and worship that they make them ready to the war at the end of six days, all them that ben archers and have bows, guns, bombards, horsemen and footmen, that all these be ready to besiege Maleperduys. I shall destroy Reynart the Fox if I be a king. Ye lords and sirs, what say ye hereto? Will ye do this with a good will?”
     And they said and cried all, “Yea we, Lord, when that ye will, we shall all go with you!”
   CHAPTER XXVI.
   How Grymbart the Dasse warned the Fox that the King was wroth with him and would slay him.
     ALL these words heard Grymbart the Dasse, which was his brother son. He was sorry and angry. If it might have profited he ran then the highway to Maleperduys ward. He spared neither bush ne hawe, but he hasted so sore that he sweat. He sorrowed in himself for Reynart his rede Eme, and as he went he said to himself, “Alas, in what danger be ye comen in! Where shall ye become! Shall I see you brought from life to death, or else exiled out of the land! Truly I may be well sorrowful, for ye be head of all our lineage; ye be wise of council, ye be ready to help your friends when they have need, ye can so well show your reasons that where ye speak ye win all.”
     With such manner wailing and piteous words came Grymbart to Maleperduys, and found Reynart his Eme there standing, which had gotten two pigeons as they came first out of their nest to assay if they could fly, and because the feathers on their wings were too short they fell down to the ground; and as Reynart was gone out to seek his meat he espied them and caught them, and was comen home with them.
     And when he saw Grymbart coming, he tarried and said, “Welcome, my best beloved Nephew that I know in all my [102] kindred. Ye have run fast, ye ben all besweat; have ye any new tidings?”
     “Alas,” said he, “lief Eme, it standeth evil with you. Ye have lost both life and good. The King hath sworn that he shall give you a shameful death. He hath commanded all his folk within six days for to be here. Archers, footmen, horsemen, and people in wains! And he hath guns, bombards, tents, and pavilions. And also he hath do laden torches. See tofore you, for ye have need. Isegrim and Bruin ben better now with the King than I am with you. All that they will is done. Isegrim hath don him to understand that ye be a thief and a murderer; he hath great envy to you. Lapreel the Cony, and Corbant the Rook have made a great complaint also. I sorrow much for your life, that for dread I am all sick.”
     “Puf!” said the Fox. “Dear Nephew, is there nothing else? Be ye so sore afraid hereof ? Make good cheer hardily. Though the King himself and all that ben in the Court hath sworn my death, yet shall I be exalted above them all. They may all fast jangle, clatter, and give counsel, but the Court may not prosper without me and my wiles and subtlety.”
   CHAPTER XXVI.
   How Reynart the Fox came another time to the Court.
     “DEAR Nephew, let all these things pass, and come here in and see what I shall give you; a good pair of fat pigeons. I love no meat better. They ben good to digest. They may almost be swolowen in all whole; the bones ben half blood; I eat them with that other. I feel myself other while encumbered in my stomach, therefore eat I gladly light meat. My wife Ermelyne shall receive us friendly, but tell her nothing of this thing for she should take it over heavily. She is tender of heart; she might for fear fall in some sickness; a little thing goeth sore to her heart. And to-morrow early I will go with you to the Court, and if I may come to speech and may be heard, I shall so answer that I shall touch [103] some nigh ynowh. Nephew, will not ye stand by me as a friend ought to do to another?”
     “Yes truly, dear Eme,” said Grymbart, “and all my good is at your commandment.”
     “God thank you, Nephew,” said the Fox. “That is well said: If I may live, I shall quite it you.”
     “Eme,” said Grymbart, “ye may well come tofore all the lords and excuse you. There shall none arrest you ne hold as long as ye be in your words. The Queen and the Leopard have gotten that.”
     Then said the Fox, “Therefor I am glad; then I care not for the best of them an hair; I shall well save myself.”
     They spoke no more hereof, but went forth into the burrow, and found Ermelyne there sitting by her younglings, which arose up anon and received them friendly. Grymbart saluted his aunt and the children with friendly words. The two pigeons were made ready for their supper, which Reynart had taken. Each of them took his part, as far as it would stretch; if each of them had had one more there should but little have left over. The Fox said, “Lief Nephew, how like ye my children Rossel and Reynerdine? They shall do worship to all our lineage. They begin already to do well. That one catcheth well a chicken, and that other a pullet. They conne well also duck in the water after lapwings and ducks. I would oft send them for provender, but I will first teach them how they shall keep them from the grynnes, from the hunters, and from the hounds. If they were so far comen that they were wise, I durst well trust to them that they should well victual us in many good divers meats that we now lack. And they like and follow me well, for they play all grimming, and where they hate they look friendly and merrily; for thereby they bring them under their feet, and bite the throat asunder. This is the nature of the Fox. They be swift in their taking, which pleaseth me well.”
     “Eme," said Grymbart, “ye may be glad that ye have such wise children. And I am glad of them also because they be of my kin.” [101]
     “Grymbart,” said the Fox, “ye have sweat and be weary. It were high tide that ye were at your rest.”
     "Eme, if it pleaseth you, it thinketh me good.” Tho lay they down on a litter made of straw. The Fox his wife and his children went all to sleep, but the Fox was all heavy and lay, sighed, and sorrowed 87 how he might best excuse himself.
     On the morrow early he roomed 88 his castle and went with Grymbart. But he took leave first of Dame Ermelyne his wife and of his children, and said, “Think not long. I must go to the Court with Grymbart, my cousin. If I tarry somewhat, be not afraid; and if ye hear any ill tidings, take it alway for the best. And see well to yourself and keep our castle well. I shall do yonder the best I can, after that I see how it goeth.”
     “Alas, Reynart,” said she, “how have ye now thus taken upon you for to go to the Court again? The last time that ye were there, ye were in great jeopardy of your life. And ye said ye would never come there more.”
     “Dame,” said the Fox, “the adventure of the world is wonderly; it goeth otherwhile by weening. Many one weeneth to have a thing which he must forego. I must needs now go thither. Be content. It is all without dread. I hope to come at altherlengest within five days again.”
     Herewith he departed; and went with Grymbart to the Court ward. And when they were upon the heath, then said Reynart, “Nephew, sith I was last shriven I have done many shrewd turns. I would ye would hear me now of all that I have trespassed in: I made the Bear to have a great wound for the male which was cut out of his skin; and also I made the Wolf and his wife to lose their shoon; I peased 89 the King with great leasings, and bare him on hand that the Wolf and the Bear would have betrayed him and would have slain him, so I made the King right wroth with them where they deserved it not; also I told to the King that there was great treasure in Hulsterlo of which he was never the better ne richer, for I lied all that I said; I led Bellyn [105] the Ram and Cuwart the Hare with me, and slew Cuwart and sent to the King by Bellyn Cuwart’s head in scorn; and I dowed 90 the Cony between the ears that almost I benamme 91 his life from him, for he escaped against my will, he was to me overswift; the Rook may well complain for I swallowed in Dame Sharpebek his wife. And also I have forgotten one thing, the last time that I was shriven to you, which I have sith bethought me; and it was of great deceit that I did; which I now will tell you.
     “I came with the Wolf walking between Houthulst and Elverdynge. There saw we go a red mare, and she had a black colt or a foal of four months old which was good and fat. Isegrim was almost storven for hunger, and prayed me go to the Mare and wit of her if she would sell her foal.
     “I ran fast to the Mare and asked that of her. She said she would sell it for money.
     “I demanded of her, how she would sell it.
     “She said, ‘It is written on my hinder foot. If ye can read and be a clerk ye may come see and read it.’
     “Tho wist I well where she would be, and I said, ‘Nay, for sooth, I cannot read. And also I desire not to buy your child. Isegrim hath sent me hither, and would fain know the price thereof.’
     “The Mare said, ‘Let him come then himself, and I shall let him have knowledge.’
     “I said, ‘I shall;’ and hastily went to Isegrim, and said, ‘Eme will you eat your bellyful of this colt, so go fast to the Mare for she tarrieth after you. She hath do write the price of her colt under her foot. She would that I should have read it, but I can not one letter, which me sore repenteth for I went never to school. Eme will ye buy that colt? Can ye read, so may ye buy it.’
     “ ‘Oh, Nephew, that can I well. What should me let? I can well French, Latin, English, and Dutch. I have gone to school at Oxenford, I have also with old and ancient doctors been in the audience and heard pleas, and also have given sentence, I am licensed in both laws; what manner writing that any man [106] can devise I can read it as perfectly as my name: I will go to her, and shall anon understand the price,’ and he bade me to tarry for him, and he ran to the Mare, and asked her how she would sell her foal or keep it. She said, ‘The sum of the money standeth written after on my foot.’ He said, ‘Let me read it.’ She said, ‘Do,’ and lifte up her foot, which was new shod with iron and six strong nails; and she smote him, without missing, on his head, that he fell down as he had been dead. A man should well have ridden a mile ere he arose. The Mare trotted away with her colt, and she left Isegrim lying shrewdly hurt and wounded. He lay and bled, and howled as an hound. I went tho to him and said, ‘Sir Isegrim, dear Eme, how is it now with you? Have you eaten yenowh of the colt? Is your belly full? Why give ye me no part? I did your errand. Have slept ye your dinner? I pray you tell me, what was written under the mare’s foot? What was it, prose or rhyme, metre or verse? I would fain know it. I trow it was cantum, for I heard you sing, me thought, from fear; for ye were so wise that no man could read it better than ye.’
     “ ‘Alas, Reynart, alas!’ said the Wolf, ‘I pray you to leave your mocking. I am so foul arrayed and sore hurt than an heart of stone might have pity on me. The Mare with her long leg had an iron foot, I weened the nails thereof had been letters, and she hit me at the first stroke six great wounds in my head that almost it is cloven. Such manner letters shall I never more desire to read.’ ‘Dear Eme, is that truth that ye tell me? I have great mervaylle. I held you for one of the wisest clerks that now live. Now I hear well it is true that I long since have read and heard, that the best clerks ben not the wisest men. The lay people otherwhile wax wise. The cause that these clerks ben not the wisest is that they study so much in the cunning and science that they therein doole.’ Thus brought I Isegrim in this great laste and harm, that he vnneth byhelde his life.
     “Lief Nephew now have I told you all my sins that I remember. Whatsoever falle at the Court—I wote never how it shall stand with me there—I am not now so sore afraid, for I am clear from [107] sin. I will gladly come to mercy and receive penance by your counsel.”
     Grymbart said, “The trespasses ben great. Nevertheless who that is dead must abide dead, and therefore I will forgive it you altogether, with the fear that ye shall suffer therefor ere ye shall conne excuse you of the death, and hereupon I will assoil you. But the most hinder that ye shall have shall be, that ye sent Cuwart's head to the Court, and that ye blinded the King with sutthe 92 lies. Eme, that was right evil done.”
     The Fox said, “What, lief nephew! Who that will go through the world this to hear and that to see and that other to tell, truly it may not clearly be done. How should any man handle honey but if he licked his fingers? I am ofttimes rored and pricked in my conscience as to love God above all thing and mine even Crysten as myself, as is to God well acceptable and according to his law. But how ween ye that reason within forth fighteth against the outward will, then stand I all still in myself, that me thinketh I have lost all my wits, and wote not what me aileth, I am then in such a thought I have now all left my sins, and hate all thing that is not good, and climb in high contemplation abone his commandments. But this special grace have I when I am alone; but in a short while after, when the world cometh in me, then find I in my way so many stones, and the foot spores 93 that these loose prelates and rich priests go in, that I am anon taken again. Then cometh the world and will have this; and the flesh will live pleasantly; which lay tofore me so many things that I then lose all my good thoughts and purpose. I hear there sing, pipe, laugh, play, and all mirth, and I hear that these prelates and rich curates preach and say all otherwise than they think and do. There learn I to lie, the leasings ben most used in the lord’s courts; certainly lords, ladies, priests, and clerks, maken most leasings. Men dare not tell to the lords now the truth. There is default. I must flatter and lie also or else I should be shut without the door. I have often heard men say truth and rightfully, and have their reason made with a leasing like to their [108] purpose, who brought it in and went through because their matter should seem the fairer. The leasing ofttimes cometh unavised, and falleth in the matter unwittingly, and so, when she is well clad, it goeth forth through with that other.
     “Dear Nephew thus must men now lie nere and there, say sooth, flatter and menace, pray and curse, and seek every man upon his feeblest and weakest. Who otherwise will now haunt and use the world than devise a leasing in the fairest wise, and that bewimple with kerchiefs about in such wise that men take it for a truth, he is not run away from his master. Can he that subtilty in such wise that he stammer not in his words, and may then be heard, Nephew, this man may do wonder. He may wear scarlet and grise.94 He winneth in the spiritual law and temporal also, and wheresomever he hath to do. Now ben there many false shrews that have great envy that they have so great fardel,95 and ween that they can also well lie; and take on them to lie and to tell it forth. He would fain eat of the fat morsels. But he is not believed ne heard. And many ben there that be so plump and foolish that when they ween best to pronounce and show their matter and conclude, they fall beside and out thereof, and cannot then help themself, and leave their matter without tail or head; and he is acompted for a fool; and many mock them therewith. But who can give to his leasing a conclusion, and pronounce it without tatelying, like as it were written tofore him, and that he can so blind the people that his leasing shall better be believed than the truth: that is the man. What cunning is it to say the truth that is good to do? How laugh these false subtle shrews that give counsel, to make these leasings and set them forth, and maken unright go above right, and maken bills and set in things that never were thought ne said, and teach men see through their fingers; and all for to win money and let their tongues to hire for to maintain and strengthen their leasings. Alas, Nephew, this is an evil cunning, of which life-scathe and hurt may come thereof.
     “I say not but that otherwhile men must jape, bourd,96 and lie [109] in small things; for whoso saith alway truth, he may not now go nowhere through the world. There ben many that play Placebo. Whoso alway saith truth, shall find many lettings in his way. Men may well lie when it is need, and after amend it by counsel. For all trespasses there is mercy. There is no man so wise, but he dooleth 97 other while.”
     Grymbart said, “Well, dear Eme, what thing shall you let? Ye know all thing at the narrowest. Ye should bring me hastily in doting; your reasons passen my understanding. What need have ye to shrive you? Ye should yourself by right be the priest, and let me and other sheep come to you for to be shriven. Ye know the state of the world in such wise as no man may halt tofore you.”
     With such manner talking they came walking in to the Court. The Fox sorrowed somewhat in his heart, nevertheless he bare it out and striked forth through all the folk till he came into the place where the King himself was.
     And Grymbart was alway by the Fox and said, “Eme, be not afraid, and make good cheer! Who that is hardy, the adventure helpeth him.98 Ofttimes one day is better than sometime a whole year.”
     The Fox said, “Nephew, ye say truth. God thank you, ye comfort me well.”
     And forth he went, and looked grimly here and there, as who saith, “What will ye? here come I.” He saw there many of his kin standing which yonned 99 him but little good, as the Otter, Beaver, and other to the number of ten whom I shall name afterward. And some were there that loved him.
     The Fox came in and fell down on his knees tofore the King, and began his words and said:— [110]
   CHAPTER XXVIII.
   How Reynart the Fox excused him before the King.
     “GOD from whom nothing may be hid, and above all thing is mighty, save my Lord the King and my Lady the Queen and give him grace to know who hath right and who hath wrong. For there live many in the world that seem otherwise outward than they be within, I would that God showed openly every man’s misdeeds, and all their trespasses stooden written in their foreheads, and it cost me more than I now say; and that ye, my Lord the King, knew as much as I do how I dispose me both early and late in your service. And therefore am I complained on of the evil shrews, and with leasings am put out of your grace and conceit, and would charge me with great offences, without deserving, against all right. Wherefore I cry out harowe on them that so falsely have belied me, and brought me in such trouble. Howbeit, I hope and know you both my Lord and my Lady for so wise and discreet, that ye be not led nor believe such leasings ne false tales out of the right way, for ye have not be woned so to do. Therefore, dear Lord, I beseech you to consider by your wisdom all things by right and law. Is it in deed or in speech, do every man right. I desire no better. He that is guilty and found faulty, let him be punished. Men shall well know ere I depart out of this Court who that I am. I cannot flatter, I will always show openly my head.”
   How the King answered upon Reynart's excuse.
     ALL they that were in the palace weren all still and wondered that the Fox spake so stoutly.
     The King said, “Ha, Reynart, how well can ye your fallacy and salutation doon! But your fair words may not help you. I think well that ye shall, this day, for your works be hanged by your neck. I will not much chide with you, but I shall short your pain. That ye love us well, that have ye well showed on [111] the Cony and on Corbant the Rook. Your falseness and your false inventions shall without long tarrying make you to die. A pot may go so long to water, that at the last it cometh tobroken home. I think your pot, that so oft hath deceived us, shall now hastily be broken.”
     Reynart was in great fear of these words. He would well he had ben at Cologne when he came thither. Then thought he I must here through, how that I do.
     “My Lord the King,” said he, “it were well reason that ye heard my words all out. Though I were dampned to the death, yet ought ye to hear my words out. I have yet heretofore time given to you many a good counsel and profitable, and in need alway have biden by you where other beasts have wyked 100 and gone their way. If now the evil beasts with false matters have tofore you with wrong belied me, and I might not come to mine excuse, ought I not then to plain? I have tofore this seen that I should be heard before another; yet might these things well change and come in their old state. Old good deeds ought to be remembered. I see here many of my lineage and friends standing, that seem they set now little by me, which nevertheless should sore dere 101 in their hearts, that ye, my Lord the King, should destroy me wrongfully. If ye so did, ye should destroy the truest servant that ye have in all your lands. What ween ye, Sir King, had I knowen myself guilty in any feat or broke,102 that I would have comen hither to the law among all mine enemies? Nay, sire, nay. Not for all the world of red gold. For I was free and at large. What need had I to do that? But, God be thanked, I know myself clear of all misdeeds, that I dare welcome openly in the light and to answer to all the complaints that any man can say on me. But when Grymbart brought me first these tidings, tho was I not well pleased but half from myself, that I leapt here and there as an unwise man, and had I not been in the censures of the Church I had without tarrying have comen, but I went dolynge 103 on the heath, and wist not what to do for sorrow. [112] And then it happened that Mertyne, mine Eme, the Ape, met with me, which is wiser in clergy than some priest. He hath ben advocate for the Bishop of Cameryk nine year during. He saw me in this great sorrow and heaviness, and said to me, ‘Dear Cousin, me thinketh ye are not well with yourself, what aileth you? Who hath displeased you? Thing that toucheth charge ought to be given in knowledge to friends. A true friend is a great help; he findeth oft better counsel than he that the charge resteth on, for whosomever is charged with matters is so heavy and acombred with them that oft he can not begin to find the remedy, for such be so woe like as they had lost their inwytte.’104 I said ‘Dear Eme, ye say truth, for in likewise is fallen to me. I am brought into a great heaviness, undeserved and not guilty, by one to whom I have alway been an hearty and great friend; that is the Cony which came to me yesterday in the morning whereas I sat tofore my house and said matins.’
     “He told me he would go to the Court, and saluted me friendly, and I him again.
     “Tho said he to me, ‘Good Reynart, I am an hungred and weary. Have ye any meat?’
     “I said, ‘Yea, ynowh; come near.’
     “Tho gave I him a couple of manchets 105 with sweet butter. It was upon a Wednesday, on which day I am not wont to eat any flesh, and also I fasted because of this feast of Whitsuntide which approached. For who that will taste of the overest wisehede, and live ghostly in keeping the commandments of our Lord, he must fast and make him ready against the high feasts. Et vos estote parati. Dear Eme, I gave him fair white bread with sweet butter, wherewith a man might well be eased that were much hungry.
     “And when he had eaten his bellyful, tho came Rossel, my youngest son, and would have taken away that was left. For young children would alway fain eten. And with that he tasted for to have taken somewhat, the Cony smote Rossel tofore his mouth that his teeth bled, and he fell down half aswoon. When [113] Reynardyn, mine eldest son, saw that, he sprang to the Cony and caught him by the head, and should have slain him had I not rescued him. I helped him, that he went from him, and beat my child sore therefor.
     “Lapreel the Cony ran to my Lord the King and said I would have murdered him. See, Eme, thus come I in the words and I am laid in the blame. And yet he complaineth, and I plain not.
     “After this came Corban the Rook fleeing with a sorrowful noise. I asked what him ailed.
     “And he said, ‘Alas my wife is dead. Yonder lieth a dead hare full of moths and worms, and there she ate so much thereof that the worms have bitten atwo her throat.’
     “I asked him how cometh that by. He would not speak a word more, but flew his way, and let me stand.
     “Now saith he that I have bitten and slain her. How should I come so nigh her? For she fleeth and I go afoot. Behold, dear Eme, thus I am born on hand. I may say well that I am unhappy. But peradventure it is for mine old sins. It were good for me if I could patiently suffer it.
     “The Ape said to me, ‘Nephew, ye shall go to the Court tofore the lords, and excuse you.’
     “ ‘Alas, Eme, that may not be, for the Archdeacon hath put me in the Pope’s curse because I counselled Isegrim the Wolf for to leave his religion at Elmare and forsake his habit. He complained to me that he lived so straitly, as in long fasting, and many things reading and singing, that he could not endure it; if he should long abide there, he should die. I had pity of his complaining, and I holpe him as a true friend, that he came out. Which now me sore repenteth, for he laboureth all that he can against me to the King for to do me be hanged. Thus doth he evil for good. See, Eme, thus am I at the end of all my wits and of counsel. For I must go to Rome for an absolution, and then shall my wife and children suffer much harm and blame. For these evil beasts that hate me shall do to them all the hurt they may, and fordrive them where they can. And I would well defend them if I were free of the curse, for then I would go to [114] the Court and excuse me, where now I dare not. I should do great sin if I came among the good people, I am afraid God should plague me.’
     “ ‘Nay, cousin, be not afraid. Ere I should suffer you in this sorrow, I know the way to Rome well. I understand me on this work. I am called there Mertyne the bishop’s clerk, and am well beknowen there. I shall do cite the Archdeacon and take a plea against him, and shall bring with me for you an absolution against his will, for I know there all that is for to be done or left. There dwelleth Simon, mine Eme, which is great and mighty there. Who that may give aught, he helpeth him anon. There is Prentout, Wayte, Scathe, and other of my friends and allies. Also I shall take some money with me if I need any. The prayer is with gifts hardy;106 with money alway the right goeth forth. A true friend shall for his friend adventure both life and good, and so shall I for you in your right. Cousin, make good cheer! I shall not rest after to-morrow till I come to Rome, and I shall solicit your matters. And go ye to the Court as soon as ye may. All your misdeeds and the sins that have brought you in the great sentence and curse, I make you quit of them and take them in myself. When ye come to the Court ye shall find there Rukenawe my wife, her two sisters, and my three children, and many more of our lineage. Dear cousin, speak to them hardily. My wife is sondrely 107 wise, and will gladly do somewhat for her friends. Who that hath need of help shall find in her great friendship. One shall alway seek on his friends, though he hath angered them, for blood must creep where it cannot go. And if so be that ye be so overcharged that ye may have no right, then send to me by night and day to the Court of Rome, and let me have knowledge thereof, and all tho that ben in the land, is it King or Queen, wife or man, I shall bring them all in the Pope’s Curse and send there an interdict that no man shall read ne singen ne christen children, ne bury the dead, ne receive sacrament, till that ye shall have good right. Cousin, this shall I well get, for the Pope is so sore old that he is but little set by, and the cardinal [115] of Pure Gold hath all the might of the Court. He is young and great of friends, he hath a concubine whom he much loveth, and what she desireth that getteth she anon. See, Cousin, she is mine niece, and I am great and may do much with her, in such wise what I desire I fail not of it but am alway furthered therein. Wherefore, Cousin, bid my Lord the King that he do you right I wote well he will not warn 108 you, for the right is heavy enough to every man.’
     “My Lord the King, when I heard this I laughed, and with great gladness came hither, and have told you all truth. If there be any in this Court that can lay on me any other matter with good witness, and prove it, as ought to be to a noble man, let me then make amends according to the law; and if ye will not leave off hereby, then set me day and field, and I shall make good on him all so ferre as he be of as good birth as I am and to me like, and who that can with fighting get the worship of the field, let him have it. This right hath standen yet hitherto, and I will not it should be broken by me. The law and right doth no man wrong.”
     All the beasts both poor and rich were all still when the Fox spake so stoutly. The Cony Lapreel and the Rook were so sore afraid that they durst not speak, but piked and striked them out of the Court both two, and when they were a room far in the plain they said, “God grant that this fell murderer may fare evil. He can bewrap and cover his falsehood, that his words seem as true as the gospel. Hereof knoweth no man than we: how should we bring witness. It is better that we wyke 109 and depart, than we should hold a field and fight with him; he is so shrewd, yea though there of us were five we could not defend us, but that he should slay us all.”
     Isegrim the Wolf and Bruin the Bear were woe in themself when they saw these twain room the court.
     The King said, “If any man will complain, let him come forth, and we shall hear him: yesterday camen here so many, where ben they now Reynart is here?”
     The Fox said, “My Lord, there ben many that complain that [116] and if they saw their adversary they would be still and make no plaint; witness now of Lapreel the Cony and Corbant the Rook, which have complained on me to you in my absence, but now that I am comen in your presence they flee away, and dare not abide by their words. If men should believe false shrews it should do much harm and hurt to the good men, as for me it skilleth not. Nevertheless, my lord, if they had by your commandment asked of me forgiveness, how be it they have greatly trespassed, yet I had for your sake pardoned and forgive them; for I will not be out of charity, ne hate ne complain on mine enemies. But I set all thing in God’s hand, he shall work and avenge it as it pleaseth him.”
     The King said, “Reynart, me thinketh ye be grieved as ye say. Are ye withinforth as ye seem outward? Nay, it is not so clear ne so open, nowhere nigh, as ye here have showed. I must say what my grief is, which toucheth your worship and life, that is to wit that you have done a foul and shameful trespass when I had pardoned you all your offences and trespasses, and ye promised to go over the sea on pilgrimage, and gave to you male and staff. And after this ye sent me by Bellyn the Ram the male again and therein Cuwart’s Head. How might ye do a more reprovable trespass? How were ye so hardy to dare to me do such a shame? Is it not evil done to send to a lord his servant’s head? Ye cannot say nay hereagainst, for Bellyn the Ram, which was our chaplain, told us all the matter how it happed? Such reward as he had when he brought us the message, the same shall ye have, or right shall fail.”
     Tho was Reynart so sore afraid that he wist not what to say. He was at his wit’s end, and looked about him piteously, and saw many of his kin and allies that heard all this, but nought they said. He was all pale in his visage, but no man proffered him hand ne foot to help him.
     The King said, “Thou subtle fellow and false shrew, why speakest thou not? Now dumb?”
     The Fox stood in great dread, and sighed sore that all heard him. But the Wolf and the Bear were glad thereof. [117]
   CHAPTER XXIX.
   How Dame Rukenawe answered for the Fox to the King.
     DAME Rukenawe the She Ape, Reynart’s Aunt, was not well pleased. She was great with the Queen and well beloved. It happened well for the Fox that she was there, for she understood all wisdom, and she durst well speak, where as it to do was. Wherever she came everich was glad of her.
     She said, “My Lord the King, ye ought not to be angry when ye sit in judgment, for that becometh not your nobleness. A man that sitteth in judgment ought to put from him all wrath and anger. A lord ought to have discretion that should sit in justice. I know better the points of the law than some that wear furred gowns, for I have learned many of them and was made cunning in the law. I had in the Pope’s palace of Woerden a good bed of hay, where other beasts lay on the hard ground, and also when I had there to do I was suffered to speak, and was heard tofore another because I knew so well the law. Seneca writeth that a lord shall overall do right and law, he shall charge none to whom he hath given his safeguard to above the right and law; the law ought not to halt for no man. And every man that standeth here would well bethink him what he hath done and bedriven110 in his days, he should the better have patience and pity on Reynart. Let every man know him self, that is my counsel. There is none that standeth so surely but otherwhile he falleth or slideth. Who that never misdid ne sinned is holy and good, and hath no need to amend him. When a man doth amiss and then by counsel amendeth it, that is humanly and so ought he to do; but alway to misdo and trespass and not to amend him, that is evil and a devily life. Mark then what is written in the gospel, Estote misericordes, be ye merciful; yet standeth there more, Nolite judicare et non judicabimini, deem ye no man and ye shall not be deemed. There standeth also how the pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery and would have stoned her to death. They [118] asked Our Lord what he said thereto; he said, ‘Who of you all is without sin let him cast the first stone.’ Tho abode no man but left her there standing. Me thinketh it is so here. There be many that see a straw in another’s eye that can not see a balke in his own. There be many that deem other, and himself is worst of all. Though one fall oft, and at last ariseth up and cometh to mercy, he is not thereof damned. God receiveth all them that desire his mercy. Let no man condemn another though they wist that he had done amiss; yet let them see their own defaults, and then may they themself correct first, and then Reynart my Cousin should not fare the worse. For his father and his grandfather have alway been in more love and reputation in this Court than Isegrim the Wolf or Bruin the Bear with all their friends and lineage. It hath been heretofore an unlike comparison, the wisdom of Reynart my Cousin, and the honour and worship of him, that he hath done, and the counsel of them; for they know not how the world goeth. Me thinketh this Court is all turned upside down. These false shrews, flatterers, and deceivers, arise and wax great by the lordes, and ben enhanced up; and the good, true, and wise ben put down, for they have been wont to counsel truly and for the honour of the King. I can not see how this may stand long.”
     Then said the King, “Dame, if he had done to you such trespass as he hath done to other it should repent you. Is it wonder that I hate him? He breaketh away my safeguard. Have ye not heard the complaints that here have been showed of him, of murder, of theft, and of treason? Have ye such trust in him? Think ye that he is thus good and clear? then set him up on the altar, and worship and pray to him as to a saint. But there is none in all the world that can say any good of him; ye may say much for him, but in the end ye shall find him all nought. He hath neither kin ne one friend that will enterprise to help him. He hath so deserved. I have great marvel of you. I heard never of none that hath fellowshipped with him that ever thanked him or said any good of him, save you now, but alway he hath striked them with his tail.” [119]
     Then the She Ape answered and said, “My lord, I love him and have him in great charity. And also I know a good deed that he once in your presence did, whereof ye could him great thank. Though now it be thus turned, yet shall the heaviest weigh most. A man shall love his friend by measure, and not his enemy hate overmuch. Steadfastness and constancy is fitting and behoveth to the lords, how soever the world turneth. Me ought not to praise too much the day, till even be come. Good counsel is good for him that will do thereafter.
   CHAPTER XXX.
   A parable of a Man that delivered a Serpent from peril of death.
     “NOW two year past came a Man and a Serpent here into this Court for to have judgment, which was to you and yours right doubtful. The Serpent stood in an hedge whereas he supposed to have gone through, but he was caught in a snare by the neck that he might not escape without help, but should have lost his life there. The Man came forth by, and the Serpent called to him and cried, and prayed the Man that he would help him out of the snare, or else he must there die.
     “The Man had pity of him, and said, ‘If thou promise to me that thou wilt not envenom me, ne do me none harm ne hurt, I shall help thee out of this peril.’
     “The Serpent was ready, and swore a great oath that he now ne never should do him harm ne hurt.
     “Then he unloosed him and delivered him out of the snare. And they went forth together a good while that the Serpent had great hunger, for he had not eaten a great while tofore, and sterte to the Man and would have slain him. The Man sterte away and was afraid, and said, ‘Wilt thou now slay me? hast thou forgotten the oath that thou madest to me that thou shouldest not misdo ne hurt me?’
     “The Serpent answered, ‘I may do it good tofore all the world that I do. The need of hunger may cause a man to break his oath.’ [120]
     “The Man said, ‘If it may be not better, give me so long respite till we meet and find that may judge the matter by right.’
     “The Serpent granted thereto. Thus they went together so long that they found Tyseln the Raven and Slyndpere his son; there rehearsed they their reasons.
     “Tyseln the Raven judged anon that he should eat the Man. He would fain have eaten his part, and his son also.
     “The Serpent said to the Man, ‘How is it now? What think ye? Have I not won?’
     “The Man said, ‘How should a robber judge this? He should have avail thereby. And also he is alone: there must be two or three at least together, and that they understand the right and law, and that done let the sentence gon; I am nevertheless ill on enough.’
     “They agreed and went forth both together so long that they found the Bear and the Wolf, to whom they told their matter.
     “And they anon judged that the Serpent should slay the Man. For the need of hunger breaketh oath alway. The Man then was in great doubt and fear, and the Serpent came and cast his venom at him; but the Man leapt away from him with great pain, and said, ‘Ye do great wrong that ye thus lie in await to slay me. Ye have no right thereto.’
     “The Serpent said, ‘Is it not enough yet? It hath been twice judged.’
     “ ‘Yea,’ said the Man, ‘that is of them that ben wont to murder and rob. All that ever they swear and promise they hold not. But I appeal this matter into the Court tofore our Lord the King, and that thou mayst not forsake.111 And what judgment that shall be given there, shall I obey and suffer, and never do the contrary.’
     “The Bear and the Wolf said that it should be so, and that the Serpent desired no better. They supposed if it should come tofore you it should go there as they would. I trow ye be well remembered hereof. Tho came they all to the Court tofore you; and the Wolf’s two children came with their father, which were called Empty Belly and Never Full, because they would eat of [121] the Man; for they howled for great hunger. Wherefore ye commanded them to avoid your Court.
     “The Man stood in great dread, and called upon your good grace, and told how the Serpent would have taken his life from him, to whom he had saved his life, and that, above his oath and promise, he would have devoured him.
     “The Serpent answered, ‘I have not trespassed, and that I report me wholly unto the King. For I did it to save my life, for need of life one may break his oath and promise.’
     “My Lord that time were ye and all your Council herewith accombred. For your noble grace saw the great sorrow of the Man, and ye would not that a man should for his gentleness and kindness be judged to death. And on that other, sith hunger, and need to save the life, seeketh narrowly to be holpen, here was none in all the Court that could ne knew the right hereof. There were some that would fain the Man had be holpen. I see them here standing. I wot well they said that they could not end this matter.
     “Then commanded ye that Reynart, my nephew, should come and say his advice in this matter. That time was he above all other believed and heard in this Court, and ye bade him give sentence according to the best right and we all shall follow him, for he knew the ground of the law.
     “Reynart said, ‘My Lord, it is not possible to give a true sentence after their words, for in hearsaying ben oft leasings. But and if I might see the Serpent in the same peril and need that he was in when the Man loosed him and unbound, then wist I well what I should say. And who that would do otherwise he should misdo against right.’
     “Then said, ye, my Lord, ‘Reynart, that is well said. We all accord hereto; for no man can say better.’
     “Then went the Man and the Serpent into the place whereas he found the Serpent. Reynart bade that the Serpent should be set in the snare in likewise as he was. And it was done.
     “Then said ye, my Lord, ‘Reynart, how thinketh you now? What judgment shall we give?’ [122]
     “Then said Reynart the Fox, ‘My Lord, now ben they both like as they were tofore. They have neither won ne lost. See, my Lord, how I judge for a right, also ferre as it shall please your noble grace. If the Man will now loose and unbind the Serpent, upon the promise and oath that he tofore made to him, he may well do it. But if he think that he for anything should be encumbered or hindered by the Serpent, or for need of hunger would break his oath and promise, then judge I that the Man may go freely where he will, and let the Serpent abide still bounden, like as he might have done at the beginning: for he would have broken his oath and promise, whereas he holp him out of such fearful peril. Thus thinketh me a rightful judgment that the Man shall have his free choice like as he tofore had.’
     “Lo my Lord this judgment thought you good, and all your council which at that time were by you; and followed the same, and praised Reynart’s wisdom, that he had made the Man quit and free. Thus the Fox wisely kept your noble honour and worship, as a true servant is bound to do to his Lord. Where hath the Bear or the Wolf done ever to you so much worship? They conne well huylen and blasen, steal and rob, and eat fat morsels and fill their bellies, and then judge they for right and law that small thieves that steal hens and chickens should be hanged, but they themself that steal kine, oxen, and horses, they shall go quit and be lords. And same as though they were wiser than Solomon, Avicene, or Aristoteles; and each will be holden high proud, and praised of great deeds and hardy; but and they come where as it is to do, they ben the first that flee. Then must the simple go forth tofore, and they keep the reward behind. Och, my Lord, these and other like to them be not wise, but they destroy town, castle, land, and people. They reck not whose house burneth, so that they may warm them by the coals. They seek all their own avail and singular profit. But Reynart the Fox and all his friends and lineage sorowen 112 and think to prefer the honour, worship, fordeel,113 and profit of their lord, and for wise counsel [123] which oft more profiteth here than pride and boast. This doth Reynart, though he have no thank. At long it shall be well known who is best and doth most profit. My Lord, ye say that his kin and lineage draw all afterward from him, and stand not by him for his falsehood and deceivable and subtle touches. I would another had said that; there should then such wrake be taken thereof that him might growl that ever he saw him. But, my Lord, we will forbear you; ye may save your pleasure; and also I say it not by you. Were there any that would bedrive anything against you, with words or with werkes, him that would we so do to, that men should say we had been there. There as fighting is, we ben not wont to be afraid. My Lord, by your leave, I may well give you knowledge of Reynart’s friends and kin. There ben many of them that for his sake and love will adventure life and good. I know myself for one. I am a wife. I should, if he had need, set my life and good for him. Also I have three full waxen children which ben hardy and strong, whom I would all together adventure for his love, rather than I should see him destroyed; yet had I liever die than I saw them miscarry tofore mine eyes, so well love I them.