CHAPTER XXXI.
   Which ben friends and kin unto Reynart the Fox.
     “THE first child is named Bytelouse, which is much cherished and can make much sport and game, wherefore is given to him the fat trenchours and much other good meat, which cometh well to profit of Fulrompe his brother. And also my third child is a daughter, and is named Hatenit, she can well pick out lice and nits out of men’s heads. These three ben to each other true, wherefore I love them well.”
     Dame Rukenawe called them forth and said, “Welcome, my dear children: to me forth, and stand by Reynart, your dear nephew.” [124]
     Then said she, “Come forth all ye that be of my kin and Reynart’s, and let us pray the King that he will do to Reynart right of the land.”
     Tho came forth many a beast anon, as the Squirrel, the Muskrat, the Fitchews, the Marten, the Beaver with his wife Ordegale, the Genete,114 the Otter, the Boussyng, and the Ferret, these twain eat as fain polaylle as doth Reynart. The Otter and Pantecroet his wife, whom I had almost forgotten, yet were they tofore, with the Beaver, enemies to the Fox, but they durst not gainsay Dame Rukenawe, for they were afraid of her. She was also the wisest of all his kin of counsel and was most doubted.115 There came also more than twenty other, because of her, for to stand by Reynart. There came also Dame Atrote with her two sisters, Weasel and Hermelin, the Ass, the Badger, the Water-rat, and many more to the number of forty, which all camen and stoden by Reynart the Fox.
     “My Lord the King,” said Rukenawe, “come and see here if Reynart have any friends. Here may ye see we ben your true subjects, which for you would adventure both life and good if ye had need. Though ye be hardy, mighty, and strong, our well-willed friendship cannot hurt you. Let Reynart the Fox well bethink him upon these matters that ye have laid against him, and if he cannot excuse them, then do him right. We desire no better. And this by right ought to no man be warned.” 116
     The Queen then spake, “This said I to him yesterday. But he was so fierce and angry that he would not hear it.”
     The Leopard said also, “Sire, ye may judge no further than your men give their verdict; for if ye would go forth by will and might, that were not worshipful for your estate. Hear always both parties, and then by the best and wisest counsel give judgment discreetly according to the best right.”
     The King said, “This is all true, but I was so sore moved when I was informed of Cuwart’s death and saw his head, that I was hot and hasty. I shall hear the Fox Can he answer and [125] excuse him of that is laid against him, I shall gladly let him go quit; and also at request of his good friends and kin.”
     Reynart was glad of these words, and thought, God thank mine Aunt, she hath the rys do blosme again.117 She hath well holpen me forth now. I have now a good foot to dance on. I shall now look out of mine eyen, and, bring forth the fairest leasing that ever man heard, and bring myself out of this danger.
   CHAPTER XXXII.
   How the Fox with subtlety excused him for the death of Cuwart the Hare and of all other matters that were laid against him,
   and how with flattering he gat again his peace of the King.
     THEN spake Reynart the Fox and said, “Alas, what say ye! is Cuwart dead? And where is Bellyn the Ram? What brought he to you when he came again? For I delivered to him three jewels; I would fain know where they ben becomen. That one of them should he have given to you, my Lord the King, and the other-two to my Lady the Queen.”
     The King said, “Bellyn brought us nought else but Cuwart’s head, like as I said you tofore; whereof I took on him wrake. I made him to lose his life, for the foul caitiff said to me that he himself was of the counsel of the letters making that were in the male.”
     “Alas, my lord, is this very truth? Woe to me caitiff that ever I was born! Sith that these good jewels be thus lost, mine heart will break for sorrow. I am sorry that I now live! What shall my wife say when she heareth hereof? She shall go out of her wit for sorrow. I shall never, all so long as I live, have her friendship. She shall make much sorrow when she heareth thereof.”
     The She Ape said, “Reynart, dear Nephew, what profiteth that ye make all this sorrow? Let it pass, and tell us what these jewels were. Peradventure we shall find counsel to have them again. If they be above earth Master Akeryn shall labour for them in [126] his books, and also we shall curse for them in all the churches, unto the time that we have knowledge where they been. They may not be lost.”
     “Nay, Aunt, think not that, for they that have them will not lightly depart from them. There was never King that ever gave so rich jewels as these be. Nevertheless ye have somewhat with your words eased mine heart and made it lighter than it was. Alas, lo, here ye may see how he or they to whom a man trusteth most is often by him or them deceived. Though I should go all the world through, and my life in adventure set therefor, I shall wit where these jewels ben becomen.”
     With a dismalled and sorrowful speech, said the Fox: “Hearken ye all my kin and friends, I shall name to you these jewels what they were, and then may ye say that I have a great loss. That one of them was a ring of fine gold, and within the ring next the finger were written letters enamelled with sable and azure, and there were three Hebrew names therein. I could not myself read ne spell them, for I understand not that language; but Master Abrion of Trier he is a wise man, he understandeth well all manner of languages and the virtue of all manner herbs, and there is no beast so fierce ne strong but he can dompte him, for if he see him once he shall do as he will, and yet he believeth not on God. He is a Jew, the wisest in conning, and specially he knoweth the virtue of stones. I showed him once this ring. He said that they were tho three names that Seth brought out of Paradise when he brought to his father Adam the Oyle of Mercy, and whosomever beareth on him these three names he shall never be hurt by thunder ne lightning, ne no witchcraft shall have power over him, ne be tempted to do sin. And also he shall never take harm by cold though he lay three winters long nights in the field, though it snowed, stormed, or frore, never so sore, so great might have these words, witness of Master Abrion. Without forth on the ring stood a stone of three manner colours; the one part was like red crystal, and shone like as fire had been therein, in such wise that if one would go by night him behoved none other light, for the shining of the stone made and gave as great a light as it [127] had been midday; that other part of the stone was white and clear as it had been burnished, who so had in his eyen any smart or soreness, or in his body any swelling, or headache, or any sickness, withoutforth if he striked this stone on the place where the grief is he shall anon be whole; or if any man be sick in his body of venom, or ill meat in his stomach, of colic, strangulation, stone, fistel, or cancer, or any other sickness, save only the very death, let him lay this stone in a little water and let him drink it, and he shall forthwith be whole and all quit of his sickness. Alas,” said the Fox, “we have good cause to be sorry to lose such a jewel! Furthermore the third colour was green like glass, but there were some sprinkles therein like purple; the master told for truth, that who that bare this stone upon him should never be hurt of his enemy, and was no man, were he never so strong and hardy, that might misdo him; and wherever that he fought he should have victory, were it by night or by day, also ferre as he beheld it fasting; and also thereto, wheresomever he went and in what fellowship, he should be beloved, though he had hated him tofore, if he had the ring upon him they should forget their anger as soon as they saw him. Also though he were all naked in a field again an hundred armed men, he should be well hearted and escape from them with worship; but he must be a noble gentleman and have no churl’s conditions, for then the stone had no might. And because this stone was so precious and good, I thought in myself that I was not able ne worthy to bear it, and therefore I sent it to my dear Lord the King, for I know him for the most noble that now liveth, and also all our welfare and worship lieth on him, and for he should be kept from all dread, need, and ungheluck.118
     “I found this ring in my father’s treasure, and in the same place I took a glass or a mirror and a comb which my wife would algates have. A man might wonder that saw these jewels. I sent these to my Lady the Queen, for I have founden her good and gracious to me. This Comb might not be too much praised. It was made of the bone of a clean noble beast named Panthera, [128] which feedeth him between the great Inde and Earthly Paradise. He is so lusty fair and of colour, that there is no colour under the heaven but some likeness is in him; thereto he smelleth so sweet, that the savour of him boteth 119 all sickness; and for his beauty and sweet smelling all other beasts follow him, for by his sweet savour they ben healed of all sickness. This Panthera hath a fair bone, broad and thin; when so is that this beast is slain all the sweet odour rested in the bone, which cannot be broken, ne shall never rot, ne be destroyed by fire, by water, ne by smiting, it is so hardy, tight and fast, and yet it is light of weight. The sweet odour of it hath great might; that who that smelleth it sette nought by none other lust in the world, and is eased and quit of all manner diseases and infirmities, and also he is jocund and glad in his heart. This Comb is polished as it were fine silver, and the teeth of it be small and strait, and between the greater teeth and the smaller is a large field and space where is carven many an image subtilly made and enamelled about with fine gold; the field is checked with sable and silver, enamelled with cybore 120 and azure, and therein is the history how Venus, Juno, and Pallas strove for the apple of gold which each of them would have had, which controversy was set upon Paris that he should give it to the fairest of them three.
     “Paris was that time an herdman, and kept his father’s beasts and sheep without Troy. When he had received the apple, Juno promised to him if he would judge that she might have the apple, he should have the most riches of the world. Pallas said if she might have the apple she would give him wisdom and strength, and make him so great a lord that he should overcome all his enemies and whom he would. Venus said, ‘What needest thou riches or strength, art not thou Priamus’ son, and Hector is thy brother, which have all Asia under their power? Art not thou one of the possessors of great Troy? If thou wilt give to me the apple, I shall give thee the richest treasure of the world, and that [129] shall be the fairest woman that ever had life on earth, ne never shall none be born fairer than she. Then shalt thou be richer than rich, and shalt climb above all other, for that is the treasure that no man can prize enough; for honest fair and good women can put away many a sorrow from the heart, they be shamefast and wise, and bring a man in very joy and bliss.’ Paris heard this Venus, which presented him this great joy and fair lady, and prayed her to name this fair lady that was so fair, and where she was. Venus said, ‘It is Helen, King Menelaus’ wife of Greece, there liveth not a nobler, richer, gentler, ne wiser wife in all the world.’ Then Paris gave to her the apple, and said that she was fairest. How that he gat afterward Helen by the help of Venus, and how he brought her in to Troy and wedded her, the great love and jolly life that they had together, was all carven in the field, everything by himself, and the story written.
     “Now ye shall hear of the Mirror. The glass that stood thereon was of such virtue that men might see therein all that was done within a mile, of men of beasts and of all thing that me would 121 desire to wit and know. And what man looked in the glass, had he only disease of pricking or motes, smart, or pearls in his eyen, he should be anon healed of it, such great virtue had the glass. Is it then wonder if I be moved and angry for to lose such manner jewels? The tree in which this glass stood was light and fast and was named Cetyne.122 It should endure ever ere it would rot, or worms should hurt it, and therefore King Solomon ceiled his temple with the same wood withinforth. Men praised it dearer than fine gold; it is like to tree of hebenus, of which wood King Crompart made his horse of tree for love of King Morcadigas’ daughter that was so fair, whom he had weened for to have won. That horse was so made within, that whosoever rode on it, if he would, he should be within less than one hour an hundred miles thence; and that was well proved, for Cleomedes the king’s son would not believe that that horse of tree had such might and virtue. He was young, lusty, and hardy, and desired to do great [130] deeds of praise for to be renowned in this world, and leapt on this horse of tree. Crompart turned a pin that stood on his breast, and anon the horse lift him up and went out of the hall by the window, and ere one might say his pater noster he was gone more than ten mile away. Cleomedes was sore afraid, and supposed never to have turned again, as the history 123 thereof telleth more plainly. But how great dread he had, and how far that he rode upon that horse made of the tree of hebenus ere he could know the art and craft how he should turn him; and how joyful he was when he knew it; and how men sorrowed for him; and how he knew all this, and the joy thereof when he came again, all this I pass over for losing of time; but the most part of all came to by the virtue of the wood, of which wood the tree that the glass stood in was made. And that was, without forth of the glass, half a foot broad, wherein stood some strange histories, which were of gold, of sable, of silver, of yellow, azure, and cynope, these six colours were therein wrought in such wise as it behoved; and under every history the words were graven and enamelled, that every man might understand what each history was. After my judgment there was never mirror so costly, so lustly, ne so pleasant. In the beginning stood there an Horse, made fat, strong, and sore envious upon an Hart which ran in the field so far and swiftly that the Horse was angry that he ran so far tofore him and could not overtake him. He thought he should catch him and subdue him, though he should suffer much pain therefor. The Horse spake tho to a Herdman in this wise, ‘If thou couldst taken an Hart that I well can show thee, thou shouldst have great profit thereof; thou shouldst sell dear his horns, his skin, and his flesh.’ The Herdman said, ‘How may I come by him?’ The Horse said, ‘Sit upon me, and I shall bear thee, and we shall hunt him till he be take.’ The Herdman sprang and sat upon the Horse, and saw the Hart; and he rode after; but the Hart was light of foot and swift, and outran the Horse far. They hunted so far after him that the Horse was weary, and said to the Herdman that sat on him, ‘Now sit off, [131] I will rest me, I am all weary, and give me leave to go from thee.’ The Herdman said, ‘I have arrested thee; thou mayst not escape from me; I have a bridle on thy head and spurs on my heels; thou shalt never have thank hereof; I shall bedwynge and subdue thee, hadst thou sworn the contrary.’
     “See how the Horse brought himself in thraldom and was taken in his own net. How may one better be taken than by his own proper envy suffer himself to be taken and ridden. There ben many that labour to hurt other, and they themselven ben hurt and rewarded with the same.
     “There was also made an Ass and an Hound which dwelled both with a rich man. The man loved his Hound well, for he played oft with him as folk do with Hounds. The Hound leapt up and played with his tail, and licked his master about the mouth. This saw Howdwin the Ass, and had great spite thereof in his heart, and said to himself, ‘How may this be? and what may my lord see on his foul Hound, whom I never see doth good ne profit save springeth on him and kisseth him? But me, whom men putten to labour, to bear and draw and do more in a week than he with his fifteen should do in a whole year,—and yet sitteth he nevertheless by him at the table and there eateth bones, flesh, and fat trenchours,—and I have nothing but thistles and nettles, and lie on nights on the hard earth, and suffer many a scorn. I will no longer suffer this. I will think how I may get my lord’s love and friendship, like as the Hound doth.’ Therewith came the lord, and the Ass lift up his tail and sprang with his fore feet on the lord’s shoulders and blared, grinned, and sang, and with his feet made two great boles about his ears, and put forth his mouth and would have kissed the lord’s mouth as he had seen the Hound done. Tho cried the lord, sore afraid, ‘Help! help! this Ass will slay me!’ Then came his servants with staves and smiten and beat the Ass so sore that he had weened he should have lost his life. Tho returned he to his stable and ate thistle and nettles and was an Ass as he tofore was. In likewise whoso have enough and spite of another’s welfare, and were served in likewise, it should be well behoveful. Therefore it is [132] concluded that the Ass shall eat thistles and nettles and bear the sack. Though men would do him worship he cannot understand it, but must use old lewd manners. Whereas asses getten lordships, there men see seldom good rule. For they take heed of nothing but on their singular profit; yet ben they take up and risen great, the more pity is.
     “Hearken further how my father and Tybert the Cat went together, and had sworn by their truth that for love ne hate they should not depart. And what they gat they should depart to each the half. Then on a time they saw hunters coming over the field with many hounds. They leapt and ran fast from themward all that they might, as they that were afraid of their life.
     “ ‘Tybert,’ said the Fox, ‘whither shall we now best flee? the hunters have espied us. Know ye any help?’ My father trusted on the promise that each made to other, and that he would for no need depart from him. ‘Tybert,’ said he, ‘I have a sackful of wiles if we have need; as far as we abide together we need not to doubt hunters ne hounds.’
     “Tybert began to sigh and was sore afraid, and said, ‘Reynart, what availlen many words? I know but one wile, and thither must I too.’
     “And tho clamb he up on a high tree into the top under the leaves, whereas hunter ne hound might do him none harm, and left my father alone in jeopardy of his life, for the hunters set on him the hounds all that they could. Men blew the horns, and cried, and hallooed, ‘The Fox! Slee and take!’ When Tybert the Cat saw that, he mocked and scorned my father and said, ‘What, Reynart, cousin, unbind now your sack where all the wiles ben in! It is now time. Ye be so wise called; help yourself, for ye have need.’
   “This much must my father hear of him to whom he had most his trust on, and was almost taken, and nigh his death. And he ran and fled with great fear of his life, and let his male slide off because he would be the lighter. Yet all that could not help him, for the hounds were too swift and should have bitten him; but he had one adventure that thereby he found an [133] old hole, wherein he crept, and escaped thus the hunters and hounds.
     “Thus held this false deceiver Tybert his sykernes that he had promised. Alas, how many ben there now a days that keep not their promise, and set not thereby though they break it! And though I hate Tybert herefor, is it wonder? But I do not. Sikerly, I love my soul too well thereto. Nevertheless, if I saw him in adventure and misfall in his body or in his goods, I trow it should not much go to my heart, so that another did it. Nevertheless, I shall neither hate him ne have envy at him. I shall, for God’s love, forgive him. Yet is it not so clear out of mine heart but a little ill-will to himward abideth therein as this cometh to my remembrance; and the cause is that the sensuality of my flesh fighteth against reason.
     “Ther stood also in that Mirror, of the Wolf, how he found once upon a heath a dead horse flayen, but all the flesh was eaten. Then went he and bote great morsels of the bones, that for hunger he took three or four at once and swallowed them in, for he was so greedy that one of the bones stack thwart in his mouth. Whereof he had great pain, and was of great fear of his life. He sought all about for wise masters and surgeons, and promised great gifts for to be healed of his disease. At last, when he could nowhere find remedy, he came to the Crane with his long neck and bill, and prayed him to help him, and he would love and reward him so well that he should ever be the better. The Crane hearked after this great reward, and put his head into his throat, and brought out the bone with his bill.
     “The Wolf start aside with the plucking, and cried out, ‘Alas, thou doest me harm! but I forgive it thee. Do no more so, I would not suffer it of another.’
     The Crane said, ‘Sir Isegrim, go and be merry, for ye be all whole. Now give to me that ye promised.’
     “The Wolf said, ‘Will ye hear what he saith? I am he that hath suffered and have cause to plain, and he will have good of me! He thanketh not me of the kindness that I did to him. He put his head in my mouth, and I suffered him to draw it out [134] whole without hurting; and he did to me also harm. And if any here should have a reward, it should be I, by right.’
     “Thus the unkind men nowadays reward them that do them good. When the false and subtle arise and become great, then goeth worship and profit all to nought. There ben many, of right that ought reward and do good to such as have helpen them in their need, that now find causes and say they be hurt, and would have amends where they ought to reward and make amends themself. Therefore it is said, and truth it is, who that will chide or chastise see that he be clear himself.
     “All this and much more than I now can well remember was made and wrought in this glass. The master that ordained it was a cunning man and a profound clerk in many sciences. And because these jewels were over good and precious for me to keep and have, therefore I sent them to my dear Lord the King and to the Queen in present. Where ben they now that give to their lords such presents. The sorrow that my two children made when I sent away the glass was great; for they were wont to look therein and see themself how their clothing and array became them on their bodies. Oh, alas! I knew not that Cuwart the Hare was so nigh his death when I delivered him the male with these jewels. I wist not to whom I might better have taken them, though it should have cost me my life, than him and Bellyn the Ram. They were two of my best friends. Out, alas! I cry upon the murderer. I shall know who it was, though I should run through all the world to seek him, for murder abideth not hid, it shall come out. Peradventure he is in this company that knoweth where Cuwart is becomen, though he telleth it not; for many false shrews walk with good men, from whom no man can keep him, they knowen their craft so well and can well cover their falseness. But the most wonder that I have is that my Lord the King here sayeth so felly, that my father nor I did him never good. That thinketh me marvel, of a king. But there come so many things tofore him that he forgetteth that one with that other, and so fareth by me. Dear Lord, remember not ye when my Lord your father lived, and ye an youngling of two year were, that [135] my father came from school from Monpellier whereas he had five year studied in recipes of medicines. He knew all the tokens of the urine as well as his hand, and also all the herbs, and nature of them which were viscous or laxative. He was a singular master in that science. He might well wear cloth of silk and a gilt girdle. When he came to Court he found the King in a great sickness, whereof he was sorry in his heart, for he loved him above all other lords. The King would not forego him, for when he came all other had leave to walk where they would; he trusted none so much as him. He said, ‘Reynart, I am sick, and feel me the longer the worse.’ My father said, ‘My dear Lord, here is an urinal: make your water therein, and as soon as I may see it I shall tell what sickness it is and also how ye shall be holpen.’ The King did as he counselled him, for he trusted no man better that lived. Though so were that my father did not as he should have done to you, but that was by counsel of evil and foul beasts —I had wonder thereof—but it was a raising against his death. He said, ‘My Lord, if ye will be whole ye must eat the liver of a wolf of seven year old, that may ye not leave or else ye shall die; for your urine showeth it plainly.’
     “The Wolf stood thereby and said nought.
     “But the King said to him, ‘Sir Isegrim, now, ye hear well that I must have your liver if I will be whole.’
     “Tho answered the Wolf and said, ‘Nay my lord not so, I wot well I am not yet five year old. I have heard my mother say so.’
     “My father said, ‘What skilleth these words? Let him be opened, and I shall know by the liver if it be good for you or not.’
     “And therewith the Wolf was taken to kitchen, and his liver taken out, which the King ate and was anon all whole of all his sickness. Then thanketh he my father much, and commanded all his household upon their lives that after that time they should call him Master Reynart.
     “He abode still by the King, and was believed of all things, and must always go by his side; and the King gave to him a [136] garland of roses which he must always wear on his head. But now this is all turned. All the old good things that he did be forgotten, and these covetous and ravenous shrews ben taken up and set on the high bench, and ben heard and made great, and the wise folk ben put aback, by which these lords oft lack, and cause them to be in much trouble and sorrow. For when a covetous man of low birth is made a lord, and is much great, and above his neighbours hath power and might, then he knoweth not himself, ne whence he is comen, and hath no pity on no man’s hurt, ne heareth no man’s request, but if he may have great gifts. All his intent and desire is to gather good, and to be greater. Oh, how many covetous men ben now in lords’ courts! They flatter and smeke,124 and please the prince, for their singular avail, but and the prince had need of them or their good, they should rather suffer him to die, or fare right hard, ere they would give or lend him. They be like the Wolf that had liefer the King had died than he would give him his liver. Yet had I liefer ere that the King or the Queen should fare amiss, that twenty such wolves should lose their lives; it were also the least loss. My lord, all this befell in your youth, that my father did thus. I trow ye have forgotten it.
     “And also I have my self done you reverence, worship, and courtesy. Unroused be it, though ye now thank me but little, but peradventure ye remembered not that I shall now say,—not to any forwitting of you, for ye be worthy all worship and reverence that any man can do; that have ye of Almighty God by inheritance of your noble progenitors, wherefore I your humble subject and servant am bounden to do to you all the service that I can or may. I came on a time walking with the Wolf Isegrim, and we had gotten under us both a Swine. And for his loud crying we bit him to death; and, sire, ye came from far out of a grove against us. Ye saluted us friendly, and said we were welcome, and that ye and my Lady the Queen, which came after you, had great hunger and had nothing for to eat, and prayed us for to give you part of our winning. Isegrim spake so soft that a man unnethe might [137] hear him, but I spake out and said, ‘yea, my lord, with a good will. Though it were more, we will well that ye have part.’ And then the Wolf departed as he was wont to do; departed, and took that one half for himself, and he gave you a quarter for you and for the Queen. That other quarter he ate and bit as hastily as he might, because he would eat it alone. And he gave to me but half the lungs, that I pray God that evil might he fare.
     “Thus showed he his conditions and nature. Ere men should have sungen a Credo, ye, my lord, had eaten your part, and yet would ye fain have had more, for ye were not full. And because he gave you no more, ne proffered you, ye lift up your right foot and smote him between the ears that ye tore his skin over his eyen, and tho he might no longer abide, but he bled, howled, and ran away, and left his part there lying. Tho said ye to him, ‘Haste ye again hither, and bring to us more. And here after see better to how ye deal and part.’ Then said I, ‘My lord, if it please you I will go with him, I wot well what ye said.’ I went with him. He bled and groaned, as sore as he was, all softly; he durst not cry loud. We went so far that we brought a calf. And when ye saw us come therewith ye laughed, for ye were well pleased, ye said to me that I was swift in hunting: ‘I see well that ye can find well when ye take it upon you. Ye be good to send forth in a need. The calf is good and fat, hereof shall ye be the dealer.’ I said, ‘My lord, with a good will. The one half, my lord, shall be for you. And that other half for my lady the Queen. The moghettis, liver, lungs, and the inward, shall be for your children. The head shall Isegrim the Wolf have, and I will have the feet.’ Tho said ye, ‘Reynart, who hath taught you to depart so courteously?’ ‘My lord,’ said I, ‘that hath done this priest that sitteth here with the bloody crown. He lost his skin with the uncourteous departing of the swine, and for his courtesy and ravin he hath hurt and shame.’
     “Alas there be many wolves now a days that, without right and reason, destroy and eat them that they may have the overhand of. They spare neither flesh ne blood, friend ne enemy. What they [138] can get that take they. O, woe be to that land and to towns where as the wolves have the overhand!
     “My lord, this and many other good thing have I done for you, that I could well tell if it were not too long, of which now ye remember little by the words I hear of you. If ye would all thing oversee well, ye would not say as ye do. I have seen the day that there should no great matter be concluded in this Court without mine advice. Albeit that this adventure is now fallen, it might happen yet that my words shall be heard and also believed as well as another’s, as far as right will, for I desire none other. For if there be any can say and make good by sufficient witnesses that I have trespassed, I will abide all the right and law that may come thereof; and if any say on me anything of which he can bring no witnesses, let me then be ruled after the law and custom of this court.”
     The King said, “Reynart, ye say reasonably. I know not of Cuwart’s death more than that Bellyn the Ram brought his head hither in the male. Thereof I let you go quit, for I have no witness thereof.”
     “My dear lord,” said Reynart, “ God thank you. Sykerly ye do well. For his death maketh me so sorrowful that methinketh my heart will break in two. Oh, when they departed from me, mine heart was so heavy that I should have swooned. I wot well it was a token of the loss that tho was so nigh coming to me.”
     All the most part of them that were there and heard the Fox’s words of the jewels, and how he made his countenance and stretched him, had verily supposed that it had not be feigned but that it had be true. They were sorry of his loss and misadventure, and also of his sorrow. The King and the Queen had both pity of him, and bade him to make not too much sorrow, but that he should endeavour him to seek them. For he had so much praised them that they had great will and desire to have them. And because he had made them to understand that he had sent these jewels to them, though they never had them yet they thanked him, and prayed him to help that they might have them.
     The Fox understood their meaning well, he thought toward [139] them but little good for all that. He said, “God thank you, my lord and my lady, that ye so friendly comfort me in my sorrow. I shall not rest night ne day, ne all they that will do anything for me, but run, and pray, threaten, and ask all the four corners of the world, though I should ever seek, till that I know where they ben bicomen. And I pray you, my Lord the King, that if they were in such place as I could not get them by prayer, by might, ne by request, that ye would assist me and abide by me; for it toucheth yourself, and the good is yours; and also it is your part to do justice on theft and murder, which both ben in this case.”
     “Reynart,” said the King, “that shall I not leave, when ye know where they ben. Mine help shall be alway ready for you.”
     “Oh, dear lord, this is too much presented to me. If I had power and might I should deserve against you.”
     Now hath the Fox his matter fast and fair, for he hath the King in his hand as he would. Him thought that he was in better case than it was like to have be; he hath made so many leasings that he may go freely where he will, without complaining of any of them all, save of Isegrim, which was to himward angry and displeased, and said, “O noble King, are ye so much childish that ye believe this false and subtle shrew, and suffer yourself with false lies thus to be deceived? Of faith it should be long or I should believe him, he is in murder and treason all bewrapped, and he mocketh you tofore your visage. I shall tell him another tale. I am glad that I see now him here. All his leasings shall not avail him ere he depart from me.”
   CHAPTER XXXIII.
   How Isegrim the Wolf complained again on the Fox.
     “MY lord, I pray you to take heed. This false thief betrayed my wife once foul and dishonestly. It was so that in a winter’s day they went together through a great water, and he bare my wife an honde that he would teach her take fish with her tail, and that [140] she should let it hang in the water a good while and there should so much fish cleave on it that four of them should not conne eat it. The fool, my wife, supposed he had said truth. And she went in the mire ere she came into the water, and when she was in the deepest of the water he bad her hold her tail till that the fish were comen. She held her tail so long that it was frozen hard in the ice and could not pluck it out. And when he saw that, he sprang up after on her body. She could not defend herself, the silly beast, she stood so deep in the mire. Hereof he cannot say nay, for I found him with the deed. Alas, what pain suffered I tho at my heart! I had almost for sorrow lost my five wits, and cried as loud as I might, and when he saw me so nigh he went his way. I went to her in a great heaviness, and went deep in that mire and that water ere I could break the ice, and much pain suffered she ere she could have out her tail, and yet left a gobbet of her tail behind her. And we were like both thereby to have lost our lives, for she yelped and cried so loud for the smart that she had ere she came out, that the men of the village came out, with staves and bills, with flail and pickforks, and the wives with their distaffs, and cried despitously, ‘Slay! slay! and smite down right!’ I was never in my life so afraid, for unnethe we escape. We ran so fast that we sweat. There was a villain that stake on us with a pike which hurted us sore; he was strong and swift a foot. Had it not be night, certainly we had been slain. The foul old queans would fain have beaten us. They said that we had bitten their sheep. They cursed us with many a curse. Tho came we in a field full of broom and brambles, there hid we us from the villains, and they durst not follow us further by night, but returned home again. See my lord this foul matter. Ye ought to do justice thereon sharply.”
     Reynart answered and said, “If this were true, it should go too nigh mine honour and worship. God forbid that it should be found true! It is well true that I taught her how she should in a place catch fish, and showed her a good way for to go over into the water without going into the mire. But she ran so desirously when she heard me name the fish, that she neither way ne path [141] held, but went into the ice wherein she was forfrorn. And that was because she abode too long. She had fish enough, if she could have be pleased with measure. It falleth oft, who that would have all loseth all. Over covetous was never good. For the beast cannot be satisfied, and when I saw her in the ice so fast I went to have holpen her, and to have brought her out, but it was all pain lost, for she was too heavy for me. Tho came Isegrim, and saw how I did all my best, and he, as a foul churl, foul and rybadously slandereth me with her, as these foul unthrifts ben wont to do. But, my dear Lord, it was none otherwise. He belieth me falsely. Peradventure his eyen dazzled as he looked from above down. He cried and cursed me, and swore many an oath I should dear abye it. When I heard him so curse and threaten I went my way, and let him curse and threaten till he was weary. And tho went he and help his wife out, and then he leapt and ran, and she also, for to get them an heat and to warm them, or else they should have died for cold. And whatsomever I have said, afore or after, that is clearly all truth. I would not for a thousand mark of fine gold lie to you one leasing. It were not fitting for me. Whatsomever fall of me, I shall say the truth, like as mine elders have always done sith the time that we first understood reason. And if ye be in doubt of anything that I have said otherwise than truth, give me respite of eight days, that I may have counsel, and I shall bring such information with good true and sufficient record that ye shall all your life during trust and believe me, and so shall all your council also. What have I to do with the Wolf? It is tofore clearly enough showed that he is a foul villainous caitiff, and an unclean beast, when he dealed and departed the swine. So it is now knowen to you all by his own words, that he is a defamer of women as much as in him is, ye may well mark euerychone. Now ask ye his wife if it be so as he saith. If she will say the truth I wot well she shall say as I do.”
     Tho spake Ersewynde the Wolf’s wife, “Ach, fell Reynart, no man can keep himself from thee,—thou canst so well utter thy words and thy falseness and reason set forth. But it shall be [142] evil rewarded in the end. How broughtest thou me once into the well, where the two buckets hung by one cord running through one pulley, which went one up and another down, thou sattest in that one bucket beneath in the pit in great dread. I came thither and heard thee sigh and make sorrow, and asked thee how thou camest there. Thou saidst that thou hadst there so many good fishes eaten out of the water that thy belly would burst. I said, ‘Tell me how I shall come to thee.’ Then saidst thou, ‘Aunt, spring into that bucket that hangeth there, and ye shall come anon to me.’ I did so; and I went downward, and ye came upward. Tho was I all angry. Thou saidst, ‘Thus fareth the world, that one goeth up and another goeth down.’ Tho sprang ye forth and went your way, and I abode there alone, sitting an whole day sore and hungered and a cold; and thereto had I many a stroke ere I could get thence.”
     “Auntie,” said the Fox, “though the strokes did you harm, I had liever ye had them than I, for ye may better bear them; for one of us must needs have had them. I taught you good, will ye understand it and think on it, that ye another time take better heed and believe no man over hastily, is he friend or cousin, for every man seeketh his own profit. They be now fools that do not so, and specially when they be in jeopardy of their lives.”
   CHAPTER XXXIV.
   A fair parable of the Fox and the Wolf.
     “MY Lord,” said Dame Ersewynde, “I pray you hear how he can blow with all winds, and how fair bringeth he his matters forth.”
     “Thus hath he brought me many time in scathe and hurt,” said the Wolf. “He hath once betrayed me to the She Ape, mine aunt, where I was in great dread and fear, for I left there almost mine one ear. If the Fox will tell it, how it befel, I will give him the fordele thereof, for I cannot tell it so well but he shall beryspe me.”
     “Well,” said the Fox, “I shall tell it without stammering. I shall say the truth. I pray you hearken me. He came into the [143] wood and complained to me that he had great hunger; for I saw him never so full but he would alway have had fain more. I have wonder where the meat becometh that he destroyeth. I see now on his countenance that he beginneth to grymme for hunger. When I heard him so complain, I had pity of him. And I said, I was also hungry. Then went we half a day together and found nothing. Tho whined he and cried, and said he might go no further. Then espied I a great hole, standing in the middis 125 under an hawe which was thick of brambles, and I heard a rushing therein, I wist not what it was. Then said I, ‘Go therein and look if there be anything there for us; I wot well there is somewhat.’ Tho said he, ‘Cousin, I would not creep into that hole for twenty pound, but 126 I wist 127 first what is therein. Methinketh that there is some perilous thing. But I shall abide here under this tree, if ye will go therein tofore. But come anon again, and let me wete128 what thing is therein. Ye can many a subtlety, and can well help yourself, and much better than I.’ See my Lord the King, thus he made me, poor wight, to go tofore into the danger, and he, which is great, long, and strong, abode without and rested him in peace. Await if I did not for him, there. I would not suffer the dread and fear that I there suffered, for all the good in earth, but if I wist how to escape. I went hardily in. I found the way dark, long, and broad. Ere I right in the hole came, so espied I a great light which came in from that one side. There lay in a great Ape with twain great wide eyen, and they glimmed as a fire; and she had a great mouth with long teeth, and sharp nails on her feet and on her hands; I weened it had be a mermouse, a baubyn, or a mercatte, for I saw never fouler beast. And by her lay three of her children, which were right foul, for they were right like the mother. When they saw me come, they gapeden wide on me and were all still. I was afraid and would well I had been thence; but I thought, I am therein, I must there through, and come out as well as I may. As I saw her, me thought she seemed more 129 [144] than Isegrim the Wolf, and her children were more than I. I saw never a fouler meyne.130 They lay on foul hay which was all bepissed. They were beslabbed and beclagged to their ears too in her own dung. It stank that I was almost smothered thereof. I durst not say but good, and then I said, ‘Aunt, God give you good day, and all my cousins, your fair children, they be of their age the fairest that ever I saw. O, Lord God, how well please they me! how lovely! how fair be they! Each of them for their beauty might be a great king’s son! Of right we ought to thank you, that ye thus increase our lineage. Dear Aunt, when I heard say that ye were delivered and laid down I could no longer abide, but must come and friendly visit you. I am sorry that I had not erst knowen it.’
     “ ‘Reynart, cousin,’ said she, ‘ye be welcome. For that ye have found me, and thus come see me, I thank you. Dear cousin, ye be right true, and named right wise in all lands, and also that ye gladly further and bring your lineage in great worship. Ye must teach my children with yours some wisdom, that they may know what they shall do and leave. I have thought on you, for gladly ye go and fellowship with the good.’
     “Oh how well was I pleased when I heard these words. This deserved I at the beginning when I called her aunt; howbeit that she was nothing sybbe to me; for my right Aunt is Dame Rukenawe that yonder standeth, which is wont to bring forth wise children.
     “I said, ‘Aunt, my life and my good is at your commandment, and what I may do for you by night and by day. I will gladly teach them all that I can.’
     “I would fain have be thence for the stench of them; and also I had pity of the great hunger that Isegrim had.
     “I said, ‘Aunt, I shall commit you and your fair children to God and take my leave. My wife shall think long after me.’
     “ ‘Dear cousin,’ said she, ‘ye shall not depart till ye have eaten; for if ye did I would say ye were not kind.’
     Tho stood she up and brought me in another hole, whereas [145] was much meat of harts and hinds, roes, pheasants, partridges, and much other venison, that I wondered from whence all this meat might come. And when I had eaten my bellyful, she gave me a great piece of an hind for to eat with my wife and with my household when I come home. I was ashamed to take it, but I might none otherwise do. I thanked her and took my leave. She bade me I should come soon again. I said I would, and so departed thence merrily that I so well had sped. I hasted me out, and when I came, saw Isegrim which lay groaning. And I asked him how he fared. He said, ‘Nephew, all evil, for it is wonder that I live. Bring ye any meat to eat? I die for hunger.’ Tho had I compassion of him and gave him that I had, and saved him there his life; whereof then he thanked me greatly, howbeit that he now oweth me evil will.
     “He had eaten this up anon, tho said he, ‘Reynart, dear cousin, what found ye in that hole? I am more hungry now than I was tofore. My teeth ben now sharped to eat.’
     “I said then, ‘Eme, haste you then lightly into that hole. Ye shall find there enough. There lieth mine Aunt with her children; if ye will spare the truth, and lie great leasings, ye shall have there all your desire. But and ye say truth, ye shall take harm.’
     “My Lord, was not this enough said and warned, who so would understand it, that all that he found, he should say the contrary. But rude and plump beasts cannot understand wisdom; therefore hate they all subtle inventions, for they cannot conceive them. Yet nevertheless, he said he would go in, and lie so many leasings, ere he should mishap, that all men should have wonder of it; and so went forth into that foul stinking hole, and found the marmosette. She was like the devil’s daughter, and on her hung much filth clottered in gobbets.
     “Tho cried he, ‘Alas, me growleth of these foul nickers! Come they out of hell? Men may make devils afraid of them. Go and drown them, that evil might they fear! I saw never fouler worms, they make all mine hair to stand right up.’
     “ ‘Sir Isegrim,’ said she, ‘what may I do thereto? They ben my children, and I must be their mother. What lieth that in [146] your way, whether they be foul or fair? They have you nothing cost. Here hath been one to-day before you which was to them nigh of kin, and was your better and wiser; and he said that they were fair. Who hath sent you hither with these tidings?’
     “ ‘Dame, will ye wit, I will eat of your meat. It is better bestowed on me than on these foul wights.’
     “She said, ‘Here is no meat.’
     “He said, ‘Here is enough.’
     “And therewith he stert with his head toward the meat, and would have gone into the hole where the meat was. But mine aunt stert up with her children, and run to him with their sharp long nails so sore that the blood ran over his eyen. I heard him cry sore and howl, but I know of no defence that he made but that he ran fast out of the hole. And he was there scratched and beaten, and many an hole had they made in his coat and skin. His visage was all on a blood and almost he had lost his one ear. He groaned and complained to me sore: then asked I him if he had well lied. He said, ‘I said like as I saw and found, and that was a foul beast with many foul wights.’
     “ ‘Nay, Eme,’ said I, ‘ye should have said Fair niece how fare ye and your fair children which ben my wellbeloved cousins?’ The Wolf said, ‘I had liefer that they were hanged ere I that said.’
     “ ‘Yea, Eme, therefore must ye receive such manner payment. It is better otherwhile to lie than to say truth. They that ben better wiser and stronger than we be have done so tofore us.’
     “See, my Lord the King, thus got he his red coif. Now standeth he all so simply as he knew no harm. I pray you ask ye him if it was not thus. He was not far off, if I wot it well.”
   CHAPTER XXXV.
   How Isegrim proffered his glove for the Fox to fight with him.
     THE Wolf said, “I may well forbear your mocks and your scorns and also your fell venomous words, strong thief that ye are. Ye said that I was almost dead for hunger, when ye help me in my need. [147] That is falsely lied, for it was but a bone that ye gave to me, ye had eaten away all the flesh that was thereon. And ye mock me and say that I am hungry, here where I stand. That toucheth my worship too nigh,—what many a spity word have ye brought forth with false leasings!—and that I have conspired the King’s death, from the treasure that ye have said to him is in Hulsterlo,—and ye have also my wife shamed and slandered that she shall never recover it, and I should ever be disworshipped thereby if I avenged it not. I have forborne you long, but now ye shall not escape me. I can not make hereof great proof, but I say here tofore my lord and tofore all them that ben here that thou art a false traitor and a murderer, and that I shall prove and make good on thy body within lists in the field, and that body against body, and then shall our strife have an end. And thereto I cast to thee my glove, and take thou it up I shall have right of thee or die therefor.”
     Reynart the Fox thought, How come I on this campaign? we ben not both like. I shall not well conne stand against this strong thief. All my proof is now come to an end.
   CHAPTER XXXVI.
   How the Fox took up the glove. And how the King set to them day and field for to come and do their battle.
     YET thought the Fox I have good advantage: the claws of his forefeet ben off, and his feet ben yet sore thereof, when for my sake he was unshoed. He shall be somewhat the weaker.
     Then said the Fox, “Who that saith that I am a traitor or a murderer, I say he lieth falsely; and that art thou specially Isegrim. Thou bringest me there as I would be. This have I oft desired. Lo here is my pledge that all thy words ben false, and that I shall defend me and make good that thou liest.”
     The King received the pledges, and admitted the battle, and asked borowes 131 of them both that on the morn they should come [148] and perform their battle, and do as they ought to do. Then the Bear and the Cat were borowes for the Wolf; and for the Fox were borowes Grymbart the Dasse and Byteluys.
   CHAPTER XXXVII.
   How Rukenawe the She Ale counselled the Fox how he should behave him in the field against the Wolf.
     The She Ape said to the Fox, “Reynart Nephew, see that ye take heed in your battle. Be cold and wise. Your Eme taught me once a prayer that is of much virtue to him that shall fight; and a great master and a wise clerk, and was abbot of Boudelo, that taught him, he said, who that said devoutly this prayer fasting shall not that day be overcomen in battle ne in fighting. Therefore, dear Nephew, be not afraid, I shall read it over you to-morrow, then may ye be sure enough of the Wolf. It is better to fight than to have the neck asunder.”
     “I thank you, dear aunt,” said the Fox. “The quarrel that I have is rightful, therefore I hope I shall speed well, and that shall greatly be mine help.”
     All his lineage abode by him all the night and holp him to drive away the time.
     Dame Rukenawe the She Ape, his aunt, thought alway on his profit and fordele. And she did all his hair from the head to the tail be shorn off smooth; and she anointed all his body with oil of olive; and then was his body also glat 132 and slipper that the Wolf should have none hold on him. And he was round and fat also on his body.
     And she said to him, “Dear cousin, ye must now drink much that to-morrow ye may the better make your urine; but ye shall hold it in till ye come to the field. And when need is and time, so shall ye piss full your rough tail and smite the Wolf therewith in his beard. And if ye might hit him therewith in his eyen, then shall ye byneme him 133 his sight. That should much hinder him. [149] But else, hold alway your tail fast between your legs that he catch you not thereby; and hold down your ears lying plat after your head that he hold you not thereby; and see wisely to yourself. And at beginning flee from his strokes, and let him spring and run after you, and run tofore where as most dust is, and stir it with your feet that it may flee in his eyen, and that shall much hinder his sight. And while he rubbeth his eyen, take your advantage and smite and bite him there as ye may most hurt him, and alway to hit him with your tail full of piss in his visage, and that shall make him so woe that he shall not wit where he is. And let him run after you for to make him weary. Yet his feet ben sore of that ye made him to lose his shoes, and though he be great he hath no heart. Nephew, certainly this is my counsel. The connyng goeth tofore strength; therefore see for yourself, and set yourself wisely at defence, that ye and we all may have worship thereof. I would be sorry if ye mishapped. I shall teach you the words that your Eme Martin taught me, that ye may overcome your enemy, as I hope ye shall do without doubt.”
     Therewith she laid her hand upon his head, and said these words: “Blaerde Shay Alphenio Kasbue Gorfons Alsbuifrio. Nephew, now be ye sure from all mischief and dread. And I counsel you that ye rest you a little, for it is by the day ye shall be the better disposed; we shall awake you in all in time.”
     “Aunt,” said the Fox, “I am now glad. God thank you, ye have done to me such good I can never deserve it fully again. Methinketh there may nothing hurt me sith that ye have said these holy words over me.”
     Tho went he and laid him down under a tree in the grass, and slept till the sun was risen. Tho came the Otter and waked him, and bad him arise, and gave him a good young duck and said, “Dear cousin, I have this night made many a leap in the water ere I could get this young fat duck. I have taken it from a fowler. Take and eat it.”
     Reynart said, “This is good handsel. If I refused I were a fool. I thank you, cousin, that ye remember me. If I live I shall reward you.” [150]
     The Fox ate the duck without sauce or bread. It savoured him well, and went well in. And he drank thereto four great draughts of water. Then went he to the battle ward, and all they that loved him went with him.
   CHAPTER XXXVIII.
   How the Fox came into the field and how they fought.
     WHEN the King saw Reynart thus shorn and oiled he said to him, “Ey, Fox, how well can ye see for yourself!”
     He wondered thereof; he was foul to look on.
     But the Fox said not one word, but kneeled down low to the earth unto the King and to the Queen, and striked him forth into the field.
     The Wolf was there ready and spake many a proud word. The rulers and keepers of the field were the Leopard and the Losse.134 They brought forth the book on which sware the Wolf that the Fox was a traitor and a murderer, and none might be falser than he was, and that he would prove on his body and make it good. Reynart the Fox sware that he lied as a false knave and a cursed thief, and that he would do good on his body.
     When this was done, the governors of the field bade them do their devoir. Then roomed they all the field, save Dame Rukenawe the She Ape, she abode by the Fox and bade him remember well the words that she had said to him. She said, “See well to. When ye were seven years old ye were wise enough to go by night without lantern or moonshine where ye wist to win any good. Ye ben named among the people wise and subtle. Pain yourself to work so that ye win the prize, then may ye have ever honour and worship, and all we that ben your friends.”
     He answered, “My dearest aunt, I know it well. I shall do my best, and think on your counsel. I hope so to do that all my lineage shall have worship thereby, and mine enemies shame and confusion.”
     She said, “God grant it you.” [151]
   CHAPTER XXXIX.
   How the Fox and the Wolf fought together.
     THEREWITH she went out of the field and let them twain go together. The Wolf trode forth to the Fox in great wrath, and opened his forefeet, and supposed to have taken the Fox in them. But the Fox sprang from him lightly, for he was lighter to foot than he. The Wolf sprang after, and hunted the Fox sore. Their friends stood without the lists and looked upon them. The Wolf strode wider than Reynart did, and oft overtook him, and lift up his foot and weened to have smitten him. But the Fox saw to, and smote him with his rough tail, which he had all bepissed, in his visage. Tho weened the Wolf to have ben plat blind; the piss started in his eyen. Then must he rest, for to make clean his eyen. Reynart thought on his fordele, and stood above the wind scraping and casting with his feet the dust, that it flew the Wolf’s eyenful. The Wolf was sore blinded therewith, in such wise that he must leave the running after him, for the sand and piss cleaved under his eyen, that it smarted so sore that he must rub and wash it away.
     Tho came Reynart in a great anger and bote 135 him three great wounds on his head with his teeth, and said, “What is that, Sir Wolf! Hath one there bitten you? How is it with you? I will all otherwise on you yet. Abide. I shall bring you some new thing. Ye have stolen many a lamb, and destroyed many a simple beast, and now falsely have appealed me and brought me in this trouble. All this shall I now avenge on thee. I am chosen to reward thee for thine old sins, for God will no longer suffer thee in thy great raven and shrewdness. I shall now assoil thee, and that shall be good for thy soul. Take patiently this penance, for thou shalt live no longer. The hell shall be thy purgatory. Thy life is now in my mercy, but and if thou wilt kneel down and ask me forgiveness, and knowledge thee to be overcomen, yet though thou be evil, yet I will spare thee. For [152] my conscience counselleth me I should not gladly slay no man.”
     Isegrim weened with these mocking and spiteous words to have gone out of his wits; and that dered 136 him so much that he wist not what to say, buff ne haft, he was so angry in his heart. The wounds that Reynart had given him bled and smarted sore, and he thought how he might best avenge it.
     With great anger he lift up his foot and smote the Fox on the head so great a stroke that he fell to the ground. Tho stert the Wolf to, and weened to have taken him. But the Fox was light and wily, and rose lightly up, and met with him fiercely. And there began a fell battle which dured long. The Wolf had great spite on the Fox, as well it seemed. He sprang after him ten times each after other, and would fain have had him fast. But his skin was so slipper and fat of the oil, that alway he escaped from him. O, so subtle and snelle 137 was the Fox, that many times when the Wolf weened well to make sure of him, he stert then between his legs and under his belly, and then turned he again and gave the Wolf a stroke with his tail in his eyen, that Isegrim weened he should have lost his sight, and this did he often times. And alway when he had so smitten him, then would he go above the wind and raise the dust, that it made his eyen full of stuffs. Isegrim was woebegone, and thought he was at an afterdele;138 yet was his strength and might much more than the Fox’s. Reynart had many a sore stroke of him when he raught 139 him. They gave each other many a stroke and many a bite when they saw their advantage, and each of them did his best to destroy that other. I would I might see such a battle. That one was wily, and that other was strong. That one fought with strength, and that other with subtlety.
     The Wolf was angry that the Fox endured so long against him. If his foremost feet had been whole, the Fox had not endured so long; but the sores were so open that he might not well run. [153] And the Fox might better off and on than he, and also he swang his tail oft under his eyen, and made him that him thought that his eyen should go out.
     At last he said to himself, I will make an end of this battle. How long shall this caitiff dure thus against me? I am so great, I should, if I lay upon him, press him to death. It is to me a great shame that I spare him so long. Men shall mock and point me with fingers to my shame and rebuke, for I am yet on the worst side. I am sore wounded; I bleed sore; and he drowneth me with his piss and casts so much dust and sand in mine eyen that hastily I shall not conne see, if I suffer him any longer. I will set it in adventure and seen what shall come thereof.
     With that he smote with his foot Reynart on the head that he fell down to the ground, and ere he could arise he caught him in his feet and lay upon him as he would have pressed him to death. Tho began the Fox to be afraid, and so were all his friends when they saw him lie under. And on that other side all Isegrim’s friends were joyful and glad. The Fox defended him fast with his claws as he lay upward with his feet, and gave many a clope.140 The Wolf durst not with his feet do him much harm, but with his teeth snatched at him as he would have bitten him. When the Fox saw that he should be bitten and was in great dread, he smote the Wolf in the head with his foremost claws and tare the skin off between his brows and his ears, and that one of his eyen hung out; which did him much pain. He howled, he wept, he cried loud, and made a piteous noise, for the blood ran down as it had been a stream.
   CHAPTER XL.
   How the Fox, being under the Wolf, with flattering wordes glosed him, that the Fox came to his above again.
     THE Wolf wiped his eyen, the Fox was glad when he saw that. He wrestled so sore, that he sprang on his feet while he rubbed his eyen. The Wolf was not well pleased therewithal, and smote [154] after him ere he escaped, and caught him in his arms, and held him fast, notwithstanding that he bled. Reynard was woe then. There wrestled they long and sore. The Wolf waxed so angry that he forgat all his smarts and pain, and threw the Fox all plat under him, which came him evil to pass, for his one hand, by which he defended him stert in the falling into Isegrim's throat, and then was he afraid to lose his hand.
     The Wolf said tho to the Fox, “Now choose, whether ye will yield you as overcome or else I shall certainly slay you. Thy scattering of the dust, thy piss, thy mocking, ne thy defence, ne all thy false wiles, may not now help thee. Thou mayest not escape me. Thou hast heretofore done me so much harm and shame, and now I have lost mine one eye and thereto sore wounded.”
     When Reynart heard that it stood so rowme 141 that he should choose to knowledge him overcomen and yield him or else to take the death, he thought the choice was worth ten mark, and that he must say that one or that other. He had anon concluded what he would say, and began to say to him with fair words in this wise:
     “Dear Eme, I will gladly become your man with all my good. And I will go for you to the holy grave, and shall get pardon and winning for your cloister of all the churches that ben in the holy land, which shall much profit to your soul and your elders’ souls also. I trow there was never such a proffer proffered to any king. And I shall serve you like as I should serve our holy father the Pope. I shall hold of you all that I have, and ever ben your servant, and forth I shall make that all my lineage shall do in like wise. Then shall ye be a lord above all lords. Who should then dare do anything against you? And furthermore whatsomever I take of polaille, geese, partridge, or plover, fish or flesh, or whatsomever it be, thereof shall ye first have the choice, and your wife and your children, ere any come in my body. Thereto I will alway abide by you, that where ye be there shall no hurt ne scathe come to you. Ye be strong, and I am wily: let us abide together that, one with the counsel and that other [155] with the deed, then may there nothing misfall to usward. And we ben so nigh of kin each to other that of right should be no anger between us. I would not have foughten against you if I might have escaped. But ye appealed me first unto fight, tho must I do that I not do would gladly. And in this battle I have ben curtoys to you, I have not showed the utterest of my might on you like as I would have done if ye had been a stranger to me; for the Nephew ought to spare the Eme, it is good reason and it ought so to be. Dear Eme, so have I now do, and that may ye mark well when I ran tofore you, mine heart would not consent thereto. For I might have hurt you much more than I did, but I thought it never; for I have not hurt you, ne done you so much harm that may hinder you, save only that mishap that is fallen on your eye. Ach! therefore I am sorry, and suffer much sorrow in my heart. I would well, dear Eme, that it had not happed you, but that it had fallen on me, so that ye therewith had been pleased; howbeit that ye shall have thereby a great advantage. For when ye hereafter sleep ye need not to shut but one window where another must shut two. My wife and my children and my lineage shall fall down to your feet, tofore the King and tofore all them that ye will, desire and pray you humbly that ye will suffer Reynart, your nephew, live; and also I shall knowledge oft to have trespassed against you, and what leasings I have lied upon you. How might any lord have more honour than I proffer you. I would for no good do this to another. Therefore I pray you to be pleased herewithall. I wote well, if ye would, ye might have slew me; but and ye so done had, what had ye won? So must ye ever after this time keep you from my friends and lineage. Therefore he is wise that can in his anger measure himself, and not be over hasty, and to see well what may fall or happe afterward to him. What man that in his anger can well advise him, certainly he is wise. Men find many fools that in heat hasten them so much that after they repent them and then it is too late. But, dear Eme, I trow ye be too wise so to do. It is better to have praise, honour, rest, and peace, and many friends that be ready to help him, than to have shame, [156] hurt, unrest, and also many enemies lying in a wait to do him harm. Also it is little worship to him that hath overcomen a man then to slay him. It is great shame, not for my life, though I were dead that were a little hurt.”
     Isegrim the Wolf said, “Ay, thief, how fain wouldest thou be loosed and discharged from me, that hear I well by thy words. Were thou now from me on thy free feet thou wouldst not set by me an egg shell. Though thou promisedst to me all the world of fine red gold, I would not let thee escape. I set little by thee and all thy friends and lineage. All that thou hast here said is but leasings and feigned falseness. Weenest thou thus to deceive me? it is long since that I knew thee. I am no bird to be locked, ne take by chaff. I know well enough good corn. O, how wouldest thou mock me if I let thee thus escape. Thou mightest well have said this to one that knew thee not, but to me thou losest thy flattering and sweet fluting, for I understand too well thy subtle lying tales. Thou hast so oft deceived me that me behoveth now to take good heed of thee. Thou false stinking knave, thou sayest that thou hast spared me in this battle. Look hitherward to me. Is not mine one eye out? And thereto hast thou wounded me in twenty places in my head. Thou wouldest not suffer me so long to rest as to take once my breath. I were over much a fool if I should now spare thee or be merciful to thee. So many a confusion and shame as thou hast done to me; and that also that toucheth me most of all, that thou hast disworshipped me and sklaundred Ersewynde my wife, whom I love as well as myself, and falsely deceivedst her, which shall never out of my heart: for as oft as it cometh to mine mind all mine anger and hate that I have to thee reneweth.”
     In the meanwhile that Isegrim was thus speaking, the Fox bethought him how he might help himself, and stuck his other hand after between his legs, and grepe the Wolf fast. And he wrong him so sore that for woe and pain he must cry loud and howl. Then the Fox drew his other hand out of his mouth. The Wolf had so much pain and anguish of the sore wringing, that he spit blood. [157]
   CHAPTER XLI.
   How Isegrim the Wolf was overcomen and how the battle was taken up and finished. And how the Fox had the worship.
     THIS pain did him more sorrow and woe than his eye did that so sore bled, and also it made him to overthrow all in a swoon. Then Reynart the Fox leapt upon him with all his might, and caught him by the legs, and drew him forth through the field that they all might see it, and he stack and smote him sore. Then were Isegrim’s friends all full of sorrow, and went all weeping unto their Lord the King, and prayed him that he would do cease the battle, and take it up into his hand.
     The King granted it. And then went the keepers of the field the Leopard and the Lossem and said to the Fox and to the Wolf, “Our Lord the King will speak with you, and will that this battle be ended. He will take it into his hand. He desireth that ye will give your strife unto him, for if any of you here were slain it should be great shame on both sides. For ye have as much worship of this field as ye may have.”
     And they said to the Fox, “All the beasts give to you the prize that have seen this battle.”
     The Fox said, “Thereof I thank them, and what that shall please my lord to command that shall not I gainsay. I desire no better but to have won the field. Let my friends come hither to me. I will take advice of them what I shall do.”
     They said, “That they thought it good; and also it was reason in weighty matters a man should take advice of his friends.”
     Then came Dame Slopecade and Grymbart the Dasse her husband, Dame Rukenawe with her two sisters, Byteluys and Fulrompe her two sons and Hatenit her daughter, the Flyndermows 142 and the Weasel. And there came more than twenty which would not have come if the Fox had lost the field. So who that winneth and cometh to hys aboue, he getteth great loos and worship: and who that is overthrown and hath the worse, to [158] him will no man gladly come. There came also to the Fox the Beaver, the Otter and both their wives Panthecrote and Ordegale. And the Ostrole, the Marten, the Fitchews, the Ferret, the Mouse, and the Squirrel, and many more than I can name. And all because he had won the field. Yea some came that tofore had complained on him, and were now of his next kin, and they showed him right friendly cheer and countenance. Thus fareth the world now. Who that is rich and high on the wheel, he hath many kinsmen and friends that shall help to bear out his wealth but who that is needy and in pain or in poverty findeth but few friends and kinsmen; for every man almost escheweth his company and way.
     There was then great feast. They blew up trumpets and piped with shalmoyses.
     They said all, “Dear Nephew, blessed be God that ye have sped well. We were in great dread and fear when we saw you lie under.”
     Reynart the Fox thanked all them friendly, and received them with great joy and gladness. Then he asked of them what they counselled him. If he should give the field unto the King or no?
     Dame Slopecade said, “Yea hardily cousin. Ye may with worship well set it in to his hands, and trust him well enough.”
     Tho went they all with the keepers of the field unto the King. And Reynart the Fox went tofore them all, with trumpets and pipes and much other minstrelsy. The Fox kneeled down tofore the King.
     The King bad him stand up, and said to him, “Reynart ye be now joyful. Ye have kept your day worshipfully. I discharge you, and let you go freely quit where it pleaseth you. And the debate between you, I hold it on me, and shall discuss it by reason and by counsel of noble men, and will ordain thereof that ought be done by reason, at such time as Isegrim shall be whole. And then I shall send for you to come to me, and then by God’s grace I shall give out the sentence and judgment.” [159]
   CHAPTER XLII.
   An ensample that the Fox told to the King when he had won the field.
     “MY worthy and dear Lord the King,” said the Fox, “I am well agreed and paid therewith. But when I came first into your Court there were many that were fell and envious to me, which never had hurt ne cause of scathe by me. But they thought that they might best over me, and all they crieden with mine enemies against me and would fain have destroyed me, because they thought that the Wolf was better withholden and greater with you than I was, which am your humble subject. They knew none other thing, why ne wherefore. They thought not as the wise be wont to do, that is what the end may happen.
     “My lord these ben like a great heap of hounds which I once saw stand at a lord’s place upon a dunghill, whereas they awaited that men should bring them meat. Then saw they an hound come out of the kitchen and had taken there a fair rib of beef ere it was given him. And he ran fast away withal; but the cook had espied or 143 he went away, and took a great bowl full of scalding water and cast it on his hips behind; whereof he thanked nothing the cook, for the hair behind was scalded off and his skin seemed as it had be through sodden. Nevertheless he escaped away and kept that he had won.
     “And when his fellows the other hounds saw him come with this fair rib, they called him all and said to him, ‘Oh how good a friend is the cook to thee, which hath given to thee so good a bone, whereon is so much flesh.’
     “The hound said, ‘Ye know nothing thereof. Ye praise me like as ye see me tofore with the bone. But ye have not seen me behind. Take heed, and behold me afterward on mine buttocks, and then ye shall know how I deserved it.’
     “And when they had seen him behind on his hips how that his skin and his flesh was all raw and through sodden, tho [160] growled they all and were afraid of that syedyng water; and would not of his fellowship, but fled and ran away from him, and let him there alone.
     “See, my Lord, this right have these false beasts. When they be made lords, and may get their desire, and when they be mighty and doubted,144 then ben they extortioners and scatte and pylle the people and eaten them like as they were forhungred hounds. These ben they that bear the bone in their mouth. No man dare have to do with them, but preyse all that they bedrive.145 No man dare say otherwise but such as shall please them, because they would not be shorn. And some help them forth in their unrighteous deeds because they would not have part, and lick their fingers, and strengthe them in their evil life and works. O, dear Lord, how little seen they that do thus after behind them, what the end shall be at last. They fall from high to low in great shame and sorrow, and then their works come to knowledge and be open in such wise that no man hath pity ne compassion on them in their mischief and trouble, and every man curse them and say evil by them to their shame and villainy. Many of such have been blamed and shorn full nigh, that they had no worship ne profit but lose their hair as the hound did, that is their friends which have help them to cover their misdeeds and extortions like as the hair covereth the skin. And when they have sorrow and shame for their old trespasses, then each body plucketh his hand from him, and flee, like as the hounds did from him that was scalded with the syedyng water, and let him these extortions in their sorrow and need.
     “My dear Lord King, I beseech you to remember this example of me; it shall not be against your worship ne wisdom. What ween ye how many ben there such false extortioners now in these days,—yea much worse than an hound that beareth such a bone in his mouth—in towns, in great lords’ courts, which with great facing and bracing oppress the poor people with great wrong, and sell their freedom and privileges, and bear them on hand of things that they never knew ne thought, and all for to get good [161] for their singular profit. God give them all shame, and soon destroy them, whosomever they be that so do!
     “But God be thanked,” said the Fox, “there may no man indite me, ne lineage, ne kin, of such works, but that we shall acquit us, and comen in the light. I am not afraid of any that can say on me any thing that I have done otherwise than a true man ought to do. Alway the Fox shall abide the Fox, though all his enemies had sworn the contrary. My dear Lord the King, I love you with my heart above all lords, and never for no man would I turn from you, but abide by you to the utterest. How well it hath been otherwise informed your highness, I have nevertheless alway do the best, and forth so will do, all my life that I can or may.”
   CHAPTER XLIII.
   How the King forgave the Fox all things, and made him Sovereign and greatest over all his lands.
     THE King said, “Reynart, ye be one of them that oweth me homage; which I will that ye alway so do. And also I will that, early and late, ye be of my council and one of my justices. See well to that ye not misdo ne trespass no more. I set you again in all your might and power, like as ye were tofore, and see that ye further all matters to the best right. For when ye set your wit and counsel to virtue and goodness, then may not our Court be without your advice and counsel, for here is none that is like to you in sharp and high counsel, ne subtler in finding a remedy for a mischief. And think ye on the example that ye yourself have told, and that ye haunt righteousness and be to me true. I will from henceforth work and do by your advice and counsel. He liveth not that if he misdid you, but I should sharply avenge and wreke it on him. Ye shall overall speak and say my words, and in all my land shall ye be, above all other, sovereign and my bayle.146 That office I give you. Ye may well occupy it with worship.”
     All Reynart’s friends and lineage thanketh the King highly. [162]
     The King said, “I would do more for your sake than ye ween. I pray you all that ye remember him that he be true.”
     Dame Rukenawe then said, “Yes sykerly, my Lord, that shall he ever be, and think ye not the contrary. For if he were otherwise, he were not of our kin ne lineage, and I would ever missake him, and would ever hinder him to my power.”
     Reynart the Fox thanked the King with fair courteous words, and said, “Dear Lord, I am not worthy to have the worship that ye do to me. I shall think thereon and be true to you all so long as I live, and shall give you as wholesome counsel as shall be expedient to your good grace.”
     Herewith he departed with his friends from the King.
     Now hark how Isegrim the Wolf did. Bruin the Bear, Tybert the Cat, and Ersewynde and her children with their lineage drewen the Wolf out of the field, and laid him upon a litter of hay, and covered him warm, and looked to his wounds which were well twenty-five. And there came wise masters and surgeons which bound them and wash them. He was so sick and feeble that he had lost his feeling, but they rubbed and wryued 147 him under his temples and eyen, that he sprang out of his swound, and cried so loud that all they were afraid. They had weened that he had been wood.148
     But the masters gave him a drink that comforted his heart and made him to sleep. They comforted his wife, and told to her that there was no death-wound ne peril of his life. Then the Court brake up; and the Beasts departed and went to their places and homes that they came from.
   CHAPTER XLIV.
   How the Fox with his friends and lineage departed nobly from the King and went to his castle Malperduys.
     REYNART the Fox took his leave honestly of the King and of the Queen. And they bade him he should not tarry long, but shortly return to them again. [163]
     He answered and said, “Dear King and Queen, alway at your commandment I shall be ready, if ye need anything, which God forbid. I would alway be ready with my body and my good to help you, and also all my friends and lineage in likewise shall obey your commandment and desire. Ye have highly deserved it, God quite it you, and give you grace long to live. And I desire your license and leave to go home to my wife and children. And if your good grace will anything, let me have knowledge of it, and ye shall find me alway ready.”
     Thus departed the Fox with fair words from the King.
     
     
   Now who that could set him in Reynart’s craft, and could behave him in flattering and lying as he did, he should I trow be heard, both with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. They ben many, and also the most part, that creep after his way and his hole. The name that was given to him abideth alway still with him. He hath left many of his craft in this world which alway wax and become mighty: for who that will not use Reynart’s craft now is nought worth in the world, nor in any estate that is of might. But if he can creep in Reynart’s net and hath been his scholar, then may he dwell with us, for then knoweth he well the way how he may arise, and is set up above of every man. There is in the world much seed left of the Fox which now overall groweth and cometh sore up. Though they have no red beards, yet there ben founden more foxes now than ever were heretofore. The righteous people ben all lost; Truth and Righteousness ben exiled and fordriven; and for them ben abiden with us Covetyse, Falsehood, Hate, and Envy; these reign now much in every country. For is it in the Pope’s court, the Emperor’s, the King's, Duke’s, or any other lord's, wheresomever it be, each man laboureth to put other out from his worship, office and power, for to make himself to climb high, with lies, with flattering, with simony, with money, or with strength and force. There is nothing beloved ne known in the court nowadays but Money. The Money is better beloved than God. For men do much more therefor: for whosomever bringeth Money shall be well received, and shall have [164] all his desire, is it of lords or of ladies or any other. That Money doth much harm. Money bringeth many in shame and dread of life, and bringeth false witness against true people for to get Money. It causeth uncleanness of living, lying, and lechery. Now clerks gon to Rome, to Paris, and to many another place, for to learn Reynart’s craft: is he clerk, is he layman, everiche of them treadeth in the Fox’s path, and seeketh his hole. The world is of such condition now, that every man seeketh himself in all matters. I wot not what end shall come to us hereof. All wise men may sorrow well herefor. I fear that for the great falseness, theft, robbery, and murder, that is now used so much and commonly, and also the unshamefast lechery and avoultry,149 bosted, blowen abroad with the avaunting of the same, that without great repentance and penance therefor that God will take vengeance and punish us sore therefor. Whom I humbly beseech, and to whom nothing is hid, that he will give us grace to make amends to him therefor and that we may rule us to his pleasure.
     And herewith will I leave; for what have I, to write of these misdeeds? I have enough to do with mine own self. And so it were better that I held my peace and suffer, and the best that I can, do, for to amend myself now in this time. And so I counsel every man to do, here in this present life, and that shall be most our profit. For after this life cometh no time that we may occupy to our advantage for to amend us. For then shall every man answer for himself and bear his own burthen.
     
     Reynart’s friends and lineage to the number of forty have taken also their leave of the King, and went all together with the Fox, which was right glad that he had so well sped and that he stood so well in the King’s grace. He thought that he had no shame, but that he was so great with the King that he might help and further his friends, and hinder his enemies, and also to do what he would without he should be blamed; if he would be wise.
     The Fox and his friends went so long together that they camen to his burgh to Malperduys, there they all took leave of each [165] other with fair and courteous words. Reynart did to them great reverence, and thanked them all friendly of their good faith and also worship that they had done and showed to him. And proffered to each of them his service, if they had need, with body and goods. And herewith they departed, and each of them went to their own houses.
     The Fox went to Dame Ermelyne his wife, which welcomed him friendly. He told to her and to his children all the wonder that to him was befallen in the Court, and forgot not a word, but told to them every deal how he had escaped. Then were they glad that their father was so enhanced and great with the King. And the Fox lived forthon with his wife and his children in great joy and gladness.
     
     Now who that said to you of the Fox more or less than ye have heard or read, I hold it for leasing. But this that ye have heard or read, that may ye believe well. And who that believeth it not, is not therefore out of the right belief; howbeit there be many if that they had seen it they should have none less doubt of it. For there ben many things in the world which ben believed though they were never seen: also there ben many figures, plays, founden that never were done ne shaped, but for an example to the people that they may there learn better to use and follow virtue and to eschew sin and vices. In like wise may it be by this book that who that will read this matter, though it be of japes and bourds, yet he may find therein many a good wisdom, and learnings by which he may come to virtue and worship. There is no one man blamed herein; it is spoken generally. Let every man take his own part as it belongeth and behoveth, and he that findeth him guilty in any deal or part thereof, let him repent and amend him. And he that is verily good, I pray God keep him therein. And if any thing be said or written herein that may grieve or displease any man, blame not me but the Fox, for they be his words and not mine.