CHAPTER XI.
   How Grymbart the Dasse brought the fox to the law tofore the King.
     “NOW go forth, Grymbart, and see well tofore you. Reynart is so fell and false, and so subtle, that ye need well to look about you and to beware of him.”
     Grymbart said he should see well to.
     Thus went Grymbart to Maleperduys ward, and when he came thither he found Reynart the Fox at home, and Dame Ermelyn his wife lay with her whelps in a dark corner.
     Tho spake Grymbart and saluted his Eme and his Aunt, and said to Reynart, “Eme, beware that your absence hurt you not in such matters as be laid and complained on you; but if ye [65] think it good, it is high time that ye come with me to the Court. The withholding you from it can do you no good. There is much thing complained over you, and this is the third warning; and I tell you for truth, if ye abide to-morrow all day, there may no mercy help you. Ye shall see that within three days that your house shall be besieged all about, and there shall be made tofore it gallows and rack. I say you truly ye shall not then escape, neither with wife ne with child, the King shall take all your lives from you. Therefore it is best that ye go with me to the Court. Your subtle wise counsel shall peradventure avail you. There ben greater adventures falle, ere this; for it may hap ye shall go quit of all the complaints that ben complained on you, and all your enemies shall abide in the shame. Ye have ofttimes done more and greater things than this.”
     Reynart the Fox answered, “Ye say sooth. I trow it is best that I go with you, for there lacketh my counsel. Peradventure the King shall be merciful to me if I may come to speak with him, and see him under his eyen. Though I had done much more harm, the Court may not stand without me; that shall the King well understand. Though some be so fell to me ward, yet it goeth not to the heart. All the council shall conclude much by me. Where great Courts ben gathered, of kings or of great lords, whereas needeth subtle counsel, there must Reynart find the subtle means. They may well speak and say their advice, but tho mine is best, and that goeth tofore all other. In the Court ben many that have sworn to do me the worst they can, and that causeth me a part to be heavy in my heart, for many may do more than one alone that shall hurt me. Nevertheless, nephew, it is better I go with you to the Court and answer for myself, than to set me my wife and my children in adventure for to be lost. Arise up, let us go hence. He is over mighty for me. I must do as he will. I cannot better it; I shall take it patiently and suffer it.”
     Reynart said to his wife Dame Ermelyn, “I betake you my children, that ye see well to them and specially to Reynkin, my youngest son. He beliketh me so well I hope he shall follow my steps. And there is Rossel a passing fair thief, I love them as well [66] as any may love his children. If God give me grace that I may escape, I shall, when I come again, thank you with fair words.” Thus took Reynart leave of his wife.
     Ah, gods! how sorrowful abode Ermelyn with her small whelps, for the victualler and he that sorrowed 43 for Maleperduys was gone his way, and the house not purveyed nor victualled.
   CHAPTER XII.
   How Reynart shrove him.
     WHEN Reynart and Grymbart had gone a while together, tho said Reynart, “Dear Cousin, now am I in great fear, for I go in dread and jeopardy of my life. I have so much repentance for my sins that I will shrive me, dear Cousin, to you; here is none other priest to get. If I were shriven of my sins my soul should be the clearer.”
     Grymbart answered, “Eme, will ye shrive you, then must ye promise first to leave your stealing and roving.”
     Reynart said, that wist he well. “Now hark, dear Cousin, what I shall say. Confiteor tibi, pater, of all the misdeeds that I have done, and gladly will receive penance for them.”
     Grymbart said, “What say ye, will ye shrive you? Then say it in English, that I may understand you.”
     Reynart said, “I have trespassed against all the beasts that live; in especial against Bruin the Bear, mine Eme, whom I made his crown all bloody; and taught Tybert the Cat to catch mice, for I made her leap in a grynne where she was all to-beaten; also I have trespassed greatly against Chanticleer with his children, for I have made him quit of a great deal of them. The King is not gone all quit, I have slandered him and the Queen many times, that they shall never be clear thereof. Yet have I beguiled Isegrim the Wolf, oftener than I can tell well. I called him Eme, but that was to deceive him; he is nothing of my kin. I made him a monk at Eelmare, where I myself also became one; [67] and that was to his hurt and no profit. I made bind his feet to the bell rope, the ringing of the bell thought him so good that he would learn to ring; whereof he had shame, for he rang so sore that all the folk in the street were afraid thereof and marvelled what might be on the bell, and ran thither tofore he had comen to axe the religion, wherefore he was beaten almost to the death. After this I taught him to catch fish, where he received many a stroke; also I led him to the richest priest’s house that was in Vermedos, this priest had a spynde wherein hung many a good flitch of bacon wherein many a time I was wont to fill my belly; in this spynde I had made an hole in which I made Isegrim to creep. There found he tubs with beef and many good flitches of bacon, whereof he ate so much without measure that he might not come out at the hole where he went in; his belly was so great and full of the meat, and when he entered his belly was small; I went in to the village and made there a great shout and noise; yet hark what I did then, I ran to the priest where he sat at the table and ate, and had tofore him as fat capon as a man might find: that capon caught I, and ran my way therewith all that I might. The priest cried out, and said, ‘Take and slay the Fox! I trow that man never saw more wonder. The Fox cometh in my house and taketh my capon from my table: where saw ever man an hardier thief!’ and as me thought he took his table knife and cast it at me, but he touched me not. I ran away, he shoved the table from him and followed me crying ‘Kill and slay him!’ I too go, and they after, and many moo came after, which all thought to hurt me.
     “I ran so long that I came whereas Isegrim was, and there I let fall the capon, for it was too heavy for me, and against my will I left it there, and then I sprang through a hole whereas I would be. And as the priest took up the capon, he espied Isegrim and cried, ‘Smite down here, friends, here is the thief, the Wolf! See well to, that he escape us not!’ They ran all together with stocks and staves, and made a great noise, that all the neighbours camen out, and gave him many a shrewd stroke, and threw at him great stones, in such wise that he fell down as he had been [68] dead. They slipped him and drew him over stones and over blocks without the village and threw him into a ditch, and there he lay all the night. I wot never how he came thence, sith I have goten of him, for as much as I made him to fill his belly, that he sware he would be mine help a whole year.
     “Tho led I him to a place where I told him there were seven hens and a cock which sat on a perch and were much fat. And there stood a fall-door by, and we climbed thereup. I said to him if he would believe me, and that he would creep into the door, he should find many fat hens. Isegrim went all laughing to the doorward, and crept a little in, and tasted here and there, and at last he said to me, ‘Reynart, ye bord and jape with me, for what I seek I find not.’ Then said I, ‘Eme, if ye will find, creep further in. He that will win, he must labour and adventure. They that were wont to sit there, I have them away.’ Thus I made him to seek further in, and shoved him forth so far, that he fell down upon the floor, for the perch was narrow. And he fell so great a fall, that they sprang up all that slept, and they that next the fire cryden that the fall-door was open and something was falle, and they wist not what it might be. They rose up and light a candle, and when they saw him, they smiten, beaten, and wounded him to the death. I have brought him thus in many a jeopardy, more than I can now reckon. I should find many more, if I me well bethought, which I shall tell you hereafter. Also I have bedriuen 44 with dame Ersewynde his wife. I would I had not done it. I am sorry for it. It is to her great shame, and that me repenteth.”
     Grymbart said, “Eme, I understand you not.”
     He said, “I have trespassed with his wife.”
     “Ye shrive you, as though ye held somewhat behind. I wot not what ye mean, ne where ye have learned this language.”
     “Ach, Dear Neve, it were great shame if I should say it openly as it happened. I have lain by mine aunt, I am your Eme, I should anger you if I spake villainy of women. Nephew, now [69] have I told you all that I can think on. Set me penance, and assoil me, for I have great repentance.”
     Grymbart was subtle and wise. He broke a rod off a tree and said, “Eme, now shall ye smite yourself thrice with this rod on your body, and then lay it down upon the ground, and spring three times thereover, without bowing of your legs and without stumbling, and then shall ye take it up and kiss it friendly in token of meekness and obedience of your penance that I gave you. Herewith be ye quit of all sins that ye have done to this day, for I forgive it you all.”
     The Fox was glad.
     Tho said Grymbart to his Eme, “Eme, see now forthon that ye do good works: read your psalms, go to church, fast, and keep your holydays, and give your alms; and leave your sinful and ill life, your theft, and your treason, and so may ye come to mercy.”
     The Fox promised that he would so do, and then went they both together to the Court ward.
     A little beside the way as they went stood a cloister of black nuns, where many geese, hens and capons went without the walls; and as they went talking the Fox brought Grymbart out of' the right way thither, and without the walls by the barn went the polaylle. The Fox espied them, and saw a fat young capon which went alone from his fellows, and leapt, and caught him that the feathers flew about his ears, but the capon escaped.
     Grymbart said, “What, Eme, cursed man, what will ye do! Will ye for one of these pullets fall again in all your sins of which ye have shriven you ? Ye ought sore repent you.”
     Reynart answered, “Truly, cousin, I had all forgotten. Pray God that he forgive it me, for I will never do so more.”
     Then turned they again over a little bridge, yet the Fox alway looked after the polaylle; he could not refrain himself; that which clevid by the bone might not out of the flesh: though he should be hanged he could not let the looking after the polaylle as far as he might see them. [70]
     Grymbart saw his manner, and said, “Foul false deceiver, how go your eyen so after the polaylle!”
     The Fox said, “Cousin, ye misdo to say to me any such words. Ye bring me out of my devotion and prayers. Let me say a pater noster for all the souls of polaylle and geese that I have betrayed, and oft with falsehood stolen from these holy nuns.”
     Grymbart was not well apaid, but the Fox had ever his eyen toward the polaylle 45 till at last they came in the way again, and then turned they to the Courtward. How sore quaked tho Reynart when they approached the Court! For he wist well that he had for to answer to many a foul feat and theft that he had done.
     
   CHAPTER XIII.
   How the Fox came to the Court, and how he excused him
    tofore the King.
     AT the first when it was known in the Court that Reynart the Fox and Grymbart his cousin were comen to the Court, there was none so poor nor so feeble of kin and friends but that he made him ready for to complain on Reynart the Fox.
     Reynart looked as he had not been afraid, and held him better than he was, for he went forth proudly with his nephew through the highest street of the Court, right as he had been the King’s son, and as he had not trespassed to any man the value of an hair: and went in the middle of the place standing tofore Noble the King and said—
     “God give you great honour and worship. There was never King that ever had a truer servant than I have been to your good grace, and yet am. Nevertheless, dear lord, I know well that there ben many in this Court that would destroy me if ye would believe them; but nay, God thank you, it is not fitting to your crown to believe these false deceivers and liars lightly. To God mote it be complained how that these false liars and flatterers nowadays in the lord’s Courts ben most heard and believed, the [71] shrews and false deceivers ben borne up for to do to good men all the harm and scathe they may. Our Lord God shall once reward them their hire.”
     The King said, “Peace, Reynart, false thief and traitor! How well can ye bring forth fair tales! And all shall not help you a straw. Ween ye with such flattering words to be my friend, ye have so oft served me so as ye now shall well know. The peace that I have commanded and sworn, that have ye well holden, have ye?”
     Chanticleer could no longer be still, but cried, “Alas, what have I by this peace lost!”
     “Be still, Chanticleer, hold your mouth. Let me answer this foul thief. Thou shrewd fell thief,” said the King, “thou sayest that thou lovest me well: that hast thou showed well on my messengers, these poor fellows, Tibert the Cat and Bruin the Bear, which yet ben all bloody; which chide not ne say not much, but that shall this day cost thee thy life. In nomine Patris et Christi filii.”
     Said the Fox, “Dear lord and mighty King, if Bruin’s crown be bloody what is that to me? When he ate honey at Lantfert’s house in the village and did him hurt and scathe, there was he beaten therefor; if he had willed, he is so strong of limbs, he might well have be avenged ere he sprang into the water. Tho came Tybert the Cat, whom I received friendly. If he went out without my counsel for to steal mice to a priest’s house, and the priest did him harm, should I abye that, then might I say I were not happy. Not so, my liege lord. Ye may do what ye will, though my matter be clear and good; ye may siede 46 me, or roast, hang, or make me blind. I may not escape you. We stand all under your correction. Ye be mighty and strong. I am feeble, and my help is but small. If ye put me to the death it were a small vengeance.”
     Whiles they thus spake, up sprang Bellyn the Ram and his ewe Dame Olewey, and said, “My lord the King, hear our complaint.” Bruin the Bear stood up with all his lineage and his [72] fellows. Tybert the Cat, Isegrim the Wolf, Cuwart the Hare, and Panther; the Boar, the Camel, and Brunel the Goose; the Kid and Goat; Boudewyn the Ass, Borre the Bull, Hamel the Ox, and the Weasel; Chanticleer the Cock, Pertelot with all their children, all these made great rumour and noise, and came forth openly tofore their lord the King, and made that the Fox was taken and arrested.
   CHAPTER XIV.
   How the Fox was arrested and judged to death.
     HEREUPON was a Parliament; and they desired that Reynart should ben dead. And whatsomever they said against the Fox he answered to each to them. Never heard man of such beasts such plaints of wise counsel and subtle inventions. And on that other side, the Fox made his excuse so well and formably thereon, that they that heard it wondered thereof. They that heard and saw it may tell it forth for truth; I shall short the matter and tell you forth of the Fox. The King and the Council heard the witnesses of the complaints of Reynart’s misdeeds. It went with them as it oft does, the feeblest hath the worst. They gave sentence, and judged that the Fox should be dead and hanged by the neck. Tho list not he to play. All his flattering words and deceits could not help him. The judgment was given, and that must be done. Grymbart, his nephew, and many of his lineage might not find in their hearts to see him die, but took leave sorrowfully, and roomed the court.47
     The King bethought him, and marked how many a youngling departed from thence all weeping, which were nigh of his kin, and said to himself, “Here behoveth other counsel hereto; though Reynart be a shrew, there be many good of his lineage.”
     Tybert the Cat said, “Sir Bruin and Sir Isegrim, how be ye thus slow? It is almost even. Here ben many bushes and hedges. If he escaped from us and were delivered out of this peril, he is so subtle, and so wily, and can so many deceits, that [73] he should never be taken again. Shall we hang him? How stand ye all thus? Ere the gallows can be made ready it shall be night.”
     Isegrim bethought him tho, and said, “Hereby is a gibbet or gallows.” And with that word he sighed.
     And the Cat espied that, and said, “Isegrim, ye be afraid. Is it against your will? Think ye not that he himself went and laboured that both your brethren were hanged? Were ye good and wise, ye should thank him, and ye should not therewith so long tarry.”
   
   CHAPTER XV.
   How the Fox was led to the gallows.
     ISEGRIM balked 48 and said, “Ye make much ado, Sir Tybert; had we an halter which were meet for his neck and strong enough, we should soon make an end.”
     Reynart the Fox, which long had not spoken, said to Isegrim, “Short my pain. Tybert hath a strong cord which caught him in the Priest’s house. He can climb well, and is swift; let him bear up the line. Isegrim and Bruin, this becometh you well, that ye thus do to your Nephew! I am sorry that I live thus long; haste you, ye be set thereto; it is evil doo that ye tarry thus long. Go tofore, Bruin, and lead me; Isegrim, follow fast, and see well to, and be ware that Reynart go not away.”
     Tho said Bruin, “It is the best counsel that I ever yet heard, that Reynart here saith.”
     Isegrim commanded anon and bad his kin and friends that they should see to Reynart that he escaped not, for he is so wily and false. They helden him by the feet, by the beard; and so kept him that he escaped not from them.
     The Fox heard all these words, which touched him nigh, yet spake he and said, “Oh, dear Eme, methinketh ye pain yourself sore for to do me hurt and scathe. If I durst, I would pay you of mercy, though my hurt and sorrow is pleasant to you. I wot [74] well, if mine Aunt, your wife, bethought her well of old ferners,49 she would not suffer that I should have any harm; but now I am he that now ye will do on me what it shall please you. Ye Bruin and Tybert, God give you shames death but ye do to me your worst. I wot whereto I shall. I may die but once, I would that I were dead already. I saw my father die, he had soon done.”
     Isegrim said, “Let us go, for ye curse us because we lengthen the time. Evil might we fare if we abide any longer.”
     He went forth with great envy on that one side, and Bruin stood on the other side, and so led they him forth to the gallows ward. Tybert ran with a good will tofore, and bare the cord; and his throat was yet sore of the grynne, and his croppe did him woe of the stroke that he was take in; that happened by the counsel of the Fox, and that thought he now to quit.
     Tybert Isegrim and Bruin went hastily with Reynart to the place there as the felons ben wont to be put to death. Noble the King and the Queen and all that were in the Court followed after, for to see the end of Reynart. The Fox was in great dread if him myshapped, and bethought him oft how he might save him from the death; and tho three that so sore desired his death, how he might deceive them and bring them to shame; and how he might bring the King with leasings for to hold with him against them. This was all that he studied, how he might put away his sorrow with wiles, and thought thus: “Though the King and many one be upon me angry, it is no wonder, for I have well deserved it; nevertheless, I hope for to be yet their best friend. And yet shall I never do them good. How strong that the King be, and how wise that his council be, if I may brook 50 my words I know so many an invention, I shall come to mine above 51 as far as they would comen to the gallows.”
     Tho said Isegrim, “Sir Bruin, think now on your red crown which by Reynart’s mean ye caught; we have now the time that we may well reward him. Tybert, clime up hastily and bind the [75] cord fast to the lynde, and make a riding knot or a strope, ye be the lightest; ye shall this day see your will of him. Bruin, see well to, that he escape not, and hold fast. I will help that the ladder be set up, that he may go upward thereon.”
     Bruin said, “Do. I shall help him well.”
     The Fox said, “Now may my heart be well heavy for great dread; for I see the death tofore mine eyen, and I may not escape. My lord the King, and dear Queen, and forth all ye that here stand, ere I depart from this world I pray you of a boone: that I may tofore you all make my confession openly, and tell my defaults all so clearly that my soul may not be acumbred, and also that no man hereafter bear no blame for my theft ne for my treason. My death shall be to me the easier, and pray ye all to God that he have mercy on my soul.”
   CHAPTER XVI.
   How the Fox made openly his confession tofore the King and tofore all them that would hear it.
     ALL they that stood there had pity when Reynart said tho words, and said it was but a little request if the King would grant it him, and they prayed the King to grant it him.
     The King gave him leave.
     Reynart was well glad, and hoped that it might fall better, and said thus:
     “Now help, Spiritus Domini, for I see here no man but I have trespassed unto. Nevertheless yet was I, unto the time that I was weaned from the teat, one of the best children that could anywhere be found. I went tho and played with the lambs, because I heard them gladly bleat. I was so long with them that at the last I bit one; there learned I first to lappen of the blood. It savoured well; me thought it right good. And after I began to taste of the flesh thereof, I was licorous; so that after that I went to the gate into the wood, there heard I the kids bleat and I slew of them twain. I began to wax hardy [76] after. I slew hens, polaylle and geese wherever I found them. Thus worden 52 my teeth all bloody. After this, I wex so fell and so wroth that whatsomever I found that I might over, I slew all. Thereafter came I by Isegrim, now in the winter, where he hid him under a tree, arid reckoned to me that he was mine eme. When I heard him then reckon alliance, we became fellows, which I may well repent. We promised each to other to be true, and to use good fellowship, and began to wander together. He stole the great things and I the small, and all was common between us. Yet he made it so that he had the best deal;53 I got not half my part. When that Isegrim gat a calf a ram or a wether, then grimmed he, and was angry on me, and drove me from him, and held my part and his too, so good is he. Yet this was of the least. But when it so lucked that we took an ox or a cow, then came thereto his wife with seven children; so that unto me might vnnethe come one of the smallest ribs, and yet, had they eaten all the flesh thereof, therewithall must I be content; not for that I had so great need, for I have so great scatte54 and good of silver and of gold, that seven wains should not can carry it away.”
     When the King heard him speak of this great good and riches, he burned in the desire and covetyse thereof, and said, “Reynart, where is the riches becomen? tell me that.”
     The Fox said, “My lord, I shall tell you. The riches was stolen. And had it not be stolen, it should have cost you your life and you should have been murdered,—which God forbid!—and should have been the greatest hurt in the world.”
     When the Queen heard that, she was sore afraid and cried aloud, “Alas and weleaway! Reynart, what say ye? I conjure you by the long way that your soul shall go, that ye tell us openly the truth hereof, as much as ye know of this great murder that should have be done on my lord, that we all may hear it!”—
     Now hearken how the Fox shall flatter the King and Queen, and shall win both their good will and loves, and shall hinder [77] them that labour for his death. He shall unbind his pack and lie, and by flattery and fair words shall bring forth so his matters that it shall be supposed for truth.
     In a sorrowful countenance spake the Fox to the Queen, “I am in such case now that I must needs die, and had ye me not so sore conjured I will not jeopardise my soul, and if I so died I should go therefor in to the pain of hell. I will say nothing but that I will make it good, for piteously he should have been murdered of his own folk. Nevertheless they that were most principal in this feat were of my next kin, whom gladly I would not betray, if the sorrow were not of the hell.”
     The King was heavy of heart, and said, “Reynart, sayest thou to me the truth?”
     “Yes,” said the Fox. “See ye not how it standeth with me? Ween ye that I shall damn my soul? What should it avail me if I now said otherwise than truth? My death is so nigh. There may neither prayer ne good help me.” Tho trembled the Fox, by dissembling, as he had been afraid.
     The Queen had pity on him, and prayed the King to have mercy on him, in eschewing of more harm, and that he should doo the people hold their peace, and give the Fox audience, and hear what he should say.
     Tho commanded the King openly that each of them should be still, and suffer the Fox to say unberisped 55 what that he would. Then said the Fox, “Be ye now all still, sith it is the King’s will, and I shall tell you openly this treason. And therein will I spare no man that I know guilty.”
   CHAPTER XVII.
   How the Fox brought then in danger that would have brought him to death, and how he got the grace of the King.
     Now hearken how the Fox began. In the beginning he appealed Grymbart his dear Cousin, which ever had helped him in his need. [78] He did so because his words should be the better believed; and that he forthon might the better lie on his enemies. Thus began he first and said:
     “My lord, my father had found King Ermeryk’s treasure dolven in a pit; and when he had this great good, he was so proud and orguillous that he had all other beasts in despite which tofore had been his fellows. He made Tybert the Cat to go into that wild land of Ardenne to Bruin the Bear for to do him homage, and bad him say, if he would be King that he should come in to Flanders. Bruin the Bear was glad hereof, for he had long desired it, and went forth in to Flanders; where my father received him right friendly. Anon he sent for the wise Grymbart, mine nephew, and for Isegrim the Wolf, and for Tybert the Cat. Tho these five came between Gaunt and the thorp called Yfte, there they held their council an whole dark night long. What with the devil’s help and craft, and for my father’s riches, they concluded and swore there the King’s death. Now hearken, and hear this wonder. The four swore upon Isegrim’s crown that they should make Bruin a king and a lord, and bring him in the stool at Akon,56 and set the crown on his head; and if there were any of the King’s friends or lineage that would be contrary or against this, him should my father with his good and treasure fordrive, and take from him his might and power.
     “It happed so that on a morrowtide early when Grymbart, my nephew, was of wine almost drunk, that he told it to Dame Sloepcade, his wife, in counsel, and bade her keep it secret. But she anon forgat it, and said it forth in confession to my wife upon an heath where they both wenten a pilgrimage, but she must first swear, by her truth and by the holy Three Kings of Cologne, that for love ne for hate she should never tell it forth, but keep it secret. But she held it not, and kept it no longer secret but till she came to me; and she then told to me all that she heard, but I must keep it in secret. And she told me so many tokens that I felt well it was truth; and for dread and fear mine hair stood right up, and my heart became as heavy as lead and as cold as [79] ice. I thought by this a likeness which here aforetime befell to the frosshis 57 which were free and complained that they had none lord ne were not bydwongen,58 for a comynte 59 without a governor was not good, and they cried to God with a loud voice that he would ordain one that might rule them, this was all that they desired. God heard their request, for it was reasonable, and sent to them a Stork which ate and swallowed them in, as many as he could find; he was alway to them unmerciful. Tho complained they their hurt, but then it was too late; they that were tofore free and were afraid of nobody ben now bound and must obey to strength their king: herefor, ye rich and poor, I sorrowed, that it might happen us in likewise.
     “Thus, my lord the King, I have had sorrow for you whereof ye can me but little thank. I know Bruin the Bear for such a shrew and ravener, wherefore I thought if he were king we should be all destroyed and lost. I know our sovereign lord the King of so high birth, so mighty, so benign and merciful, that I thought truly it had been an evil change for to have a foul stinking thief and to refuse a noble mighty stately Lion; for the Bear hath more mad folly in his unthrifty head, and all his ancestors, than any other hath. Thus had I in mine heart many a sorrow, and thought alway how I might break and foredo my father’s false counsel, which of a churl and a traitor and worse than a thief would make a lord and a king. Alway I prayed God that he would keep our King in worship and good health, and grant him long life, but I thought well if my father held his treasure he should with his false fellows well find the way that the King should be deposed and set aside. I was sore bethought how I might best wit 60 where my father’s good lay. I awaited at all times as nigh as I could, in woods, in bushes, in fields; where my father laid his eyen; were it by night or by day, cold or wet, I was alway by him to espy and know where his treasure was laid.
     “On a time I lay down all plat on the ground and saw my [80] father come running out of an hole. Now hark what I saw him do. When he came out of the hole, he looked fast about if anybody had seen him. And when he could nowhere none see, he stopped the hole with sand and made it even and plain like to the other ground by. He knew not that I saw it. And where his footspore stood, there stryked he with his tail, and made it smooth with his mouth, that no man should espy it. That learned I there of my false father, and many subtleties that I tofore knew nothing of. Then departed he thence and ran to the village ward for to do his things; and I forgot not, but sprang and leapt to the hole ward, and how well that he had supposed that he had made all fast I was not so much a fool but that I found the hole well, and scratched and scraped with my feet the sand out of the hole, and crept therein. There found I the most plenty of silver and of gold that ever I saw. Here is none so old that ever so much saw on one heap in all his life. Tho took I Ermelyne my wife to help, and we ne rested night ne day to bear and carry away, with great labour and pain, this rich treasure in to another place that lay for us better, under an hawe in a deep hole. In the mean while that mine housewife and I thus laboured, my father was with them that would betray the King. Now may ye hear what they did. Bruin the Bear and Isegrim the Wolf sent all the land about if any man would take wages that they should come to Bruin and he would pay them their souldye or wages tofore. My father ran all over the land and bare the letters. He wist little that he was robbed of his treasure; yea though he might have wonnen all the world, he had not conne find a penny thereof.
     “When my father had been over all in the land between the Elbe and the Somme, and had gotten many a soldier that should the next summer have comen to help Bruin, tho came he again to the Bear and his fellows, and told them in how great a venture he had be tofore the boroughs in the land of Saxon, and how the hunters daily ridden and hunted with hounds after him in such wise that he unnethes escaped with his life. When he had told this to these four false traitors, then showed he them letters [81] that pleased much. To Bruin therein were written twelve hundred of Isegrim’s lineage by name, without the bears, the foxes, the cats, and the dassen, all these had sworn that with the first messenger that should come for them they should be ready, and come for to help the Bear if they had their wages a month tofore. This aspied I, I thank God. After these words my father went to the hole where his treasure had lain, and would look upon it. Tho began he a great sorrow; that he sought he found nothing. He found his hole broken, and his treasure borne away. There did he that I may well sorrow and bewail, for great anger and sorrow he went and hung himself. Thus abode the treason of Bruin by my subtilty after. Now see mine infortune. These traitors Isegrim and Bruin ben now most privy of counsel about the King, and sit by him on the high bench. And I, poor Reynart, have ne thanks ne reward. I have buried mine own father, because the King should have his life. My lord,” said the Fox, “where ben they that would so do, that is, to destroy them self for to keep you.”
     The King and the Queen hoped to win the treasure and without council took to them Reynart and prayed him that he would do so well as to tell them where this treasure was.
     Reynart said, “How should I tell the King, or them that would hang me for love of the traitors and murderers which by their flattery would fain bring me to death? Should I tell to them where my good is, then were I out of my wit.”
     The Queen then spake, “Nay, Reynart, the King shall let you have your life, and shall altogether forgive you, and ye shall be from henceforth wise and true to my lord.”
     The Fox answered to the Queen, “Dear lady, if the King will believe me, and that he will pardon and forgive me all my old trespasses, there was never King so rich as I shall make him. For the treasure that I shall do him have is right costly and may not be numbered.”
     The King said, “Ach Dame, will ye believe the Fox? Save your reverence, he is born to rob, steal, and to lie. This cleaves to his bones, and can not be had out of the flesh.” [82]
     The Queen said, “Nay, my lord, ye may now well believe him. Though he were tofore fell, he is now changed otherwise than he was. Ye have well heard that he hath impeached his father and the Dasse his nephew, which he might well have laid on other beasts if he would have been false, fell, and a liar.”
     The King said, “Dame, will ye then have it so, and think ye it best to be don, though I supposed it should hurt me I will take all these trespasses of Reynart upon me and believe his words. But I swear by my crown, if he ever hereafter misdo and trespass, that shall he dear abye and all his lineage unto the ninth degree.”
     The Fox looked on the King stoundmele,61 and was glad in his heart, and said, “My lord, I were not wise if I should say things that were not true.”
     The King took up a straw from the ground, and pardoned and forgave the Fox all the misdeeds and trespasses of his father and of him also.
     If the Fox was tho merry and glad, it was no wonder; for he was quit of his death and was all free and frank of all his enemies.
     The Fox said, “My Lord the king and noble Lady the Queen, God reward you this great worship that ye do to me. I shall think and also thank you for it in such wise that ye shall be the richest king of the world; for there is none living under the sun that I vouchsafe better my treasure on, than on you both.”
     Then took the Fox up a straw and proffered it to the King, and said, “My most dear Lord, please it you to receive here the rich treasure which King Ermeryk had. For I give it unto you with a free will, and knowledge it openly.”
     The King received the straw, and threw it merely from him with a joyous visage, and thanked much the Fox.
     The Fox laughed in himself.
     The King then hearkened after the counsel of the Fox. And all that there were were at his will.
     “My Lord,” said he, “hearken and mark well my words. In [83] the west side of Flanders there standeth a wood and is named Hulsterlo, and a water that is called Krekenpyt lieth thereby. This is so great a wilderness, that oft in a whole year man nor wife cometh therein, save they that will, and they that will not eschew it. There lieth this treasure hidden. Understand well that the place is called Krekenpyt, for I advise you, for the least hurt, that ye and my Lady go both thither; for I know none so true that I durst on your behalf trust; wherefore go yourself. And when ye come to Krekenpyt ye shall find there two birch trees standing althernext 62 the pit. My Lord, to tho birch trees shall ye go: there lieth the treasure untherdolven.63 There must ye scrape and dig away a little the moss on the one side. There shall ye find many a jewel of gold and silver, and there shall ye find the crown which king Ermeryk wore in his days. That should Bruin the Bear have worn, if his will had gone forth. Ye shall see many a costly jewel, with rich stones set in gold work, which cost many a thousand mark. My Lord the King, when ye now have all this good, how oft shall ye say in your heart and think, ‘Oh how true art thou, Reynart the Fox, that with thy subtle wit delvest and hidest this great treasure! God give thee good hap and welfare wherever thou be!’ ”
     The King said, “Sir Reynart, ye must come and help us to dig up this treasure. I know not the way. I should never conne find it. I have heard often named Paris, London, Aachen, and Cologne; as me thinketh this treasure lieth right as ye mocked and japed, for ye name Krekenpyt. That is a feigned name.”
     These words were not good to the Fox, and he said with an angry mood, and dissembled and said, “Yea, my Lord the King, ye be also nigh that as from Rome to Maye. Ween ye that I will lead you to flume 64 Jordan. Nay, I shall bring you out of weening and show it you by good witness.”
     He called loud, “Cuwart the Hare, come here tofore the King.” The beasts saw all thitherward and wondered what the King would. [84]
     The Fox said to the Hare, “Cuwart, are ye acold; how tremble ye and quake so? Be not afraid; and tell my Lord the King here the truth, and that I charge you, by the faith and truth that ye owe him and to my Lady the Queen, of such thing as I shall demand of you.”
     Cuwart said, “I shall say the truth, though I should lose my neck therefor. I shall not lie, ye have charged me so sore, if I know it.”
     “Then say, know ye not where Krekenpyt standeth? Is that in your mind?”
     The Hare said, “I knew that well twelve year agone, where that standeth. Why ask ye that? It standeth in a wood named Hulsterlo, upon a warande 65 in the wilderness. I have suffered there much sorrow for hunger and for cold, yea, more than I can tell. Pater Symonet the Friese was woned 66 to make there false money, wherewith he bare himself out and all his fellowship but that was tofore ere I had fellowship with Ryn the Hound, which made me escape many a danger; as he could well tell if he were here, and that I never in my days trespassed against the King otherwise than I ought to do with right.”
     Reynart said to him, “Go again to yonder fellowship. Hear ye, Cuwart? My Lord the King desireth no more to know of you.”
     The Hare returned and went again to the place he came from.
     The Fox said, “My Lord the King, is it true that I said?”
     “Yea, Reynart,” said the King, “forgive it me; I did evil that I believed you not. Now, Reynart, friend, find the way that ye go with us to the place and pit where the treasure lieth.”
     The Fox said, “It is a wonder thing. Ween ye that I would not fain go with you; if it were so with me that I might go with you in such wise that it no shame were unto your lordship, I would go. But nay, it may not be. Hearken what I shall say, and must needs, though it be to me villainy and shame. When [85] Isegrim the Wolf, in the devil’s name, went into religion and became a monk shorn in the order, tho the provender of six monks was not sufficient to him, and had not enough to eat, he then plained and wailed so sore that I had pity on him, for he became slow and sick. And because he was of my kin, I gave him counsel to run away, and so he did. Wherefore I stand accursed, and am in the Pope’s ban and sentence. I will to-morrow betimes, as the sun riseth, take my way to Rome for to be assoiled 67 and take pardon. And from Rome I will over the sea into the Holy Land, and will never return again till I have done so much good that I may with worship go with you. It were great reproof to you, my Lord the King, in what land that I accompanied you that men should say ye reysed 68 and accompanied yourself with a cursed and person agravate.”
     The King said, “Sith that ye stand accursed in the censures of the Church, if I went with you men should arette villainy unto my crown. I shall then take Cuwart or some other to go with me to Krekenpyt; and I counsel you, Reynart, that ye put you yourself out of this curse.”
     “My Lord,” quoth the Fox, “therefore will I go to Rome as hastily as I may. I shall not rest by night nor day till I be assoiled.”
     “Reynart,” said the King, “me thinketh ye ben turned into a good way. God give you grace to accomplish well your desire.”
     As soon as this speaking was done, Noble the King went and stood upon an high stage of stone and commanded silence to all the beasts, and that they should sit down in a ring round upon the grass, everiche in his place after his estate and birth. Reynart the Fox stood by the Queen, whom he ought well to love.
     Then said the King, “Hear ye all that be poor and rich, young and old, that standeth here. Reynart, one of the head officers of my house, had done so evil, which this day should have been hanged, hath now in this Court done so much, that I and my wife the Queen have promised to him our grace and [86] friendship. The Queen hath prayed much for him, insomuch that I have made peace with him. And I give to him his life and member freely again, and I command you upon your life that ye do worship to Reynart and his wife, and to his children, wheresomever ye meet them by day or night. And I will also hear no more complaints of Reynart. If he hath heretofore misdone and trespassed, he will no more misdo ne trespass, but now better him. He will to-morrow early go to the Pope for pardon and forgiveness of all his sins, and forth over the sea to the Holy Land, and he will not come again till he bring pardon of all his sins.”
     This tale heard Tyselyn the Raven and leapt to Isegrim to Bruin and to Tybert, there as they were, and said, “Ye caitifs, how goeth it now? Ye unhappy folk, what do ye here? Reynart the Fox is now a squire and a courtier, and right great and mighty in the Court. The King hath skylled him quite of all his brokes,69 and forgiven him all his trespasses and misdeeds. And ye be all betrayed and appeached.”
     Isegrim said, “How may this be? I trow Tyselyn that ye lie.”
     “I do not, certainly,” said the Raven.
     Tho went the Wolf and the Bear to the King. Tybert the Cat was in great sorrow, and he was so sore afraid that for to have the Fox’s friendship he would well forgive Reynart the loss of his one eye that he lost in the priest’s house, he was so woe he wist not what to do, he would well that he never had seen the Fox.
   
   CHAPTER XVIII.
   How the Wolf and the Bear were arrested by the labour of
   Reynart the Fox.
     ISEGRIM came proudly over the field tofore the King, and he thanked the Queen, and spake with a fell mood ill words on the Fox, in suchwise that the King heard it and was wroth, and [87] made the Wolf and the Bear anon to be arrested. Ye saw never wood 70 dogs do more harm than was done to them. They were both fast bounden, so sore that all that night they might not stir hand ne foot. They might scarcely roar ne move any joint. Now hear how the Fox forth did. He hated them. He laboured so to the Queen that he got leave for to have as much of the Bear’s skin upon his rigge 71 as a foot long and a foot broad, for to make him thereof a scrip; then was the Fox ready if he had four strong shoon. Now hear how he did for to get these shoon.
     He said to the Queen, “Madam, I am your pilgrim. Here is mine Eme, Sir Isegrim, that hath four strong shoon which were good for me. If he would let me have two of them I would on the way busily think on your soul, for it is right that a pilgrim should always think and pray for them that do him good. Thus may ye do your soul good if ye will. And also if ye might get of mine aunt Dame Ersewynde also two of her shoon to give me, she may well do it, for she goeth but little out, but abideth alway at home.”        
     Then said the Queen, “Reynart, you behoveth well such shoes; ye may not be without them. They shall be good for you to keep your feet whole for to pass with them many a sharp mountain and stony rocks. Ye can find no better shoes for you than such as Isegrim and his wife have and wear. They be good and strong. Though it should touch their life, each of them shall give you two shoes for to accomplish with your high pilgrimage.”
   CHAPTER XIX.
   How Isegrim and his we Ersewynde must suffer their shoes to be plucked off, and how Reynart did on the shoes for to go to Rome with.
     THUS hath this false pilgrim gotten from Isegrim two shoes from his feet, which were hauled off the claws to the sinews. Ye saw never fowl that men roasted lay so still as Isegrim did when his [88] shoes were hauled off. He stirred not, and yet his feet bled. Then when Isegrim was unshod tho must Dame Ersewynde his wife lie down in the grass with an heavy cheer. And she lost there her hinder shoes.
     Tho was the Fox glad, and said to his Aunt in scorn, “My dear Aunt, how much sorrow have ye suffered for my sake, which me sore repenteth, save this, hereof I am glad for ye be the liefest 72 of all my kin. Therefore I will gladly wear your shoes. Ye shall be partner of my pilgrimage and deal of the pardon that I shall with your shoes fetch over the sea.”
     Dame Ersewynde was so woe that she unnethe might speak. Nevertheless this she said, “Ah, Reynart, that ye now all thus have your will, I pray God to wreak 73 it!”
     Isegrim and his fellow the Bear held their peace and were all still. They were evil at ease for they were bound and sore wounded. Had Tybert the Cat have been there, he should also somewhat have suffered, in such wise as he should not have escaped thence without hurt or shame.
     The next day, when the sun arose, Reynart then did grease his shoes which he had of Isegrim and Ersewynde his wife, and did them on, and bound them to his feet, and went to the King and to the Queen and said to them with a glad cheer, “Noble Lord and Lady, God give you good morrow, and I desire of your grace that I may have male 74 and staff blessed as belongeth to a pilgrim.”
     Then the King anon sent for Bellyn the Ram, and when he came he said, “Sir Bellyn, ye shall do mass tofore Reynart, for he shall go on pilgrimage; and give to him male and staff.”
     The Ram answered again and said, “My Lord, I dare not do that, for he hath said that he is in the Pope’s curse.”
     The King said what thereof master Gelys hath said to us, if a man had don as many sins as all the world and he would tho sins forsake, shrive him and receive penance, and do by the priest’s counsel, God will forgive them and be merciful unto him. [81] Now will Reynart go over the sea into the Holy Land, and make him clear of all his sins.
     Then answered Bellyn to the King, “I will not do little ne much herein but if ye save me harmless in the spiritual court, before the bishop Prendelor and tofore his archdeacon Looswinde and tofore Sir Rapiamus his official.”
     The King began to wax wroth, and said, “I shall not bid you so much in half a year! I had liever hang you than I should so much pray you for it!”
     When the Ram saw that the King was angry, he was so sore afraid that he quoke for fear, and went to the altar and sang in his books and read such as him thought good over Reynart, which little set thereby save that he would have the worship thereof.
     When Bellyn the Ram had all said his service devoutly, then he hung on the fox's neck a male covered with the skin of Bruin the Bear and a little psalter thereby. Tho was Reynart ready toward his journey. Tho looked he toward the King, as he had been sorrowful to depart; and feigned as he had wept, right as he had yamerde 75 in his heart; but if he had any sorrow it was because all the other that were there were not in the same plight as the Wolf and Bear were brought in by him. Nevertheless he stood and prayed them all to pray for him, like as he would pray for them. The Fox thought that he tarried long and would fain have departed, for he knew himself guilty.
     The King said, “Reynart, I am sorry ye be so hasty, and will no longer tarry.”
     “Nay, my Lord, it is time, for we ought not spare to do well, I pray you to give me leave to depart: I must do my pilgrimage.”
     The King said, “God be with you,” and commanded all them of the court to go and convey Reynart on his way, save the Wolf and the Bear which fast lay bounden. There was none that durst be sorry therefor, and if ye had seen Reynart how personably he went with his male and psalter on his shoulder, and the shoes on his feet, ye should have laughed. He went and showed him [90] outward wisely, but he laughed in his heart that all they brought him forth which had a little tofore been with him so wroth. And also the King which so much hated him, he had made him such a fool that he brought him to his owne intent. He was a pilgrim of deuce ace.
     “My Lord the King,” said the Fox, “I pray you to return again, I will not that ye go any further with me. Ye might have harm thereby. Ye have there two murderers arrested. If they escape you, ye might be hurt by them. I pray God keep you from misadventure!” With these words he stood up on his afterfeet, and prayed all the beasts, great and small, that would be partners of his pardon, that they should pray for him.
     They said that they all would remember him.
     Then departed he from the King so heavily that many of them ermed.76
     Then said he to Cuwart the Hare and to Bellyn the Ram merrily, “Here, friends, shall we now depart? Yea, with a good will accompany me further. Ye two made me never angry. Ye be good for to walk with, courteous, friendly, and not complained on of any beast Ye be of good conditions and ghostly of your living; ye live both as I did when I was a recluse. If ye have leaves and grass ye be pleased, ye reck not of bread of flesh ne such manner meat.”
     With such flattering words hath Reynart these two flattered that they went with him till they came tofore his house Maleperduys. 
CHAPTER XX.
   How Cuwart the Hare was slain by the Fox.
     WHEN the Fox was come tofore the gate of his house, he said to Bellyn the Ram, “Cousin, ye shall abide here without, I and Cuwart will go in, for I will pray Cuwart to help me to take my leave of Ermelyne my wife, and to comfort her and my children.”
     Bellyn said, “I pray him to comfort them well.” [91]
     With such flattering words brought he the Hare into his hole in an evil hour. There found they Dame Ermelyne lying on the ground with her younglings, which had sorrowed much for dread of Reynart’s death. But when she saw him come, she was glad. But when she saw his male and psalter, and espied his shoes, she marvelled and said, “Dear Reynart, how have ye sped?”
     He said “I was arrested in the court, but the King let me gon. I must go a pilgrimage. Bruin the Bear and Isegrim the Wolf they be pledge for me. I thank the King he hath given to us Cuwart here, for to do with him what we will. The King said himself that Cuwart was the first that on us complained, and by the faith that I owe you I am right wroth on Cuwart.”
     When Cuwart heard these words he was sore afraid. He would have fled but he might not, for the Fox stood between him and the gate, and he caught him by the neck. Tho cried the Hare, “Help, Bellyn, help! Where be ye? This pilgrim slayeth me?” But that cry was soon done, for the Fox had anon bitten his throat a two.
     Tho said he, “Let us go eat this good fat hare.” The young whelps came also. Thus held they a great feast, for Cuwart had a good fat body. Ermelyne ate the flesh and drank the blood; she thanked oft the King that he had made them so merry. The Fox said, “Eat as much as ye may, he will pay for it if we will fetch it.”
     She said, “Reynart, I trow ye mock. Tell me the truth how ye be departed thence.”
     “Dame, I have so flattered the king and the queen that I suppose the friendship between us shall be right thin. When he shall know of this he shall be angry, and hastily seek me for to hang me by mine neck. Therefore let us depart, and steal secretly away in some other forest where we may live without fear and dread, and there that we may live seven year and more an they find us not. There is plenty of good meat of partridges, woodcocks, and much other wild fowl, Dame, and if ye will come with me thither there ben sweet wells and fair and clear running brooks; Lord God, how sweet air is there. There may we be in peace [92] and ease, and live in great wealth. For the King hath let me gon because I told him that there was great treasure in Krekenpyt, but there shall he find nothing though he sought ever. This shall sore anger him when he knoweth that he is thus deceived. What! trow ye how many a great leasing must I lie ere I could escape from him. It was hard that I escaped out of prison; I was never in greater peril ne nearer my death. But how it ever go I shall by my will never more come in the King’s danger. I have now gotten my thumb out of his mouth, that thank I my subtilty.”
     Dame Ermelyne said, “Reynart, I counsel that we go not into another forest where we should be strange and elenge. We have here all that we desire. And ye be here lord of our neighbours; wherefore shall we leave this place and adventure us in a worse? We may abide here sure enough. If the King would do us any harm or besiege us, here ben so many by or side holes, in such wise as we shall escape from him; in abiding here we may not do amiss. We know all bypaths over all, and ere he take us with might he must have much help thereto. But that ye have sworn that ye shall go oversea and abide there, that is the thing that toucheth me most.”
     “Nay, Dame, care not therefor. How more forsworn, how more forlorn. I went once with a good man that said to me that a bedwongen 77 oath, or oath sworn by force, was none oath. Though I went on this pilgrimage it should not avail me a cat’s tail. I will abide here and follow your counsel. If the King hunt after me, I shall keep me as well as I may. If he be me too mighty, yet I hope with subtlety to beguile him. I shall unbind my sack. If he will seek harm he shall find harm.”
     Now was Bellyn the Ram angry that Cuwart his fellow was so long in the hole, and called loud, “Come out, Cuwart, in the devil’s name; how long shall Reynart keep you there? Haste you, and come! Let us go.”
     When Reynart heard this, he went out and said softly to Bellyn the Ram, “Lief Bellyn, wherefore be ye angry? Cuwart speaketh with his dear Aunt. Methinketh ye ought not to be displeased [93] therefor. He bade me say to you ye might well go tofore, and he shall come after; he is lighter of foot than ye. He must tarry awhile with his Aunt and her children, they weep and cry because I shall go from them.”
     Bellyn said, “What did Cuwart? Methought he cried after help.”
     The Fox answered, “What say ye, Bellyn? Ween ye that he should have any harm? Now hark what he then did. When we were comen into mine house, and Ermelyne my wife understood that I should go over sea, she fell down in a swoon; and when Cuwart saw that, he cried loud, ‘Bellyn, come help mine Aunt to bring her out of her swoon.’ ”
     Then said the Ram, “In faith I understood that Cuwart had been in great danger.”
     The Fox said, “Nay truly, or Cuwart should have any harm in my house I had liever that my wife and children should suffer much hurt.”