

















































The Tibetan Book of the Dead




[PART I]
[THE BARDO OF THE MOMENTS

OF DEATH]
 



[INSTRUCTIONS ON THE
SYMPTOMS OF DEATH, OR THE
FIRST STAGE OF THE CHIKHAI

BARDO—, THE PRIMARY CLEAR
LIGHT SEEN AT THE MOMENT OF

DEATH]
 

The first, the setting—face—to—face with the Clear Light, during
the Intermediate State of the Moments of Death, is:

Here [some there may be] who have listened much [to religious
instructions] yet not recognized ; and [some] who, though recognizing,
are, nevertheless, weak in familiarity. But all classes of individuals
who have received the practical teachings [called] Guides2 will, if this
be applied to them, be set face to face with the fundamental Clear
Light; and, without any Intermediate State, they will obtain the Unborn
Dhartna—Kaya, by the Great Perpendicular Path.3

The manner of application is:
It is best if the guru from whom the deceased received guiding

instructions can be had; but if the guru cannot be obtained, then a
brother of the Faith; or if the latter is also unobtainable, then a learned
man of the same Faith; or, should all these be unobtainable, then a
person who can read correctly and distinctly ought to read this many
times over. Thereby [the deceased] will be put in mind of what he had
[previously] heard of the setting—face—to—face and will at once
come to recognize that Fundamental Light and undoubtedly obtain
Liberation.

As regards the time for the application [of these instructions ]:
When the expiration hath ceased, the vital—force will have sunk

into the nerve—centre of Wisdom1 and the Knower2 will be



experiencing the Clear Light of the natural condition.3 Then, the vital
—force,4 being thrown backwards and flying downwards through the
right and left nerves,6 the Intermediate State momentarily dawns.

The above [directions] should be applied before [the vital—force
hath] rushed into the left nerve [after first having traversed the navel
nerve—centre].

The time [ordinarily necessary for this motion of the vital force] is
as long as the inspiration is still present, or about the time required for
eating a meal.1

Then the manner of the application [of the instructions] is:
When the breathing is about to cease, it is best if the Transference

hath been applied efficiently; if [the application] hath been inefficient,
then [address the deceased] thus:

O nobly—born (so and so by name), the time hath now come for
thee to seek the Path [in reality]. Thy breathing is about to cease. Thy
guru hath set thee face to face before with the Clear Light; and now
thou art about to experience it in its Reality in the Bardo state,
wherein all things are like the void and cloudless sky, and the naked,
spotless intellect is like unto a transparent vacuum without
circumference or centre. At this moment, know thou thyself; and
abide in that state. I, too, at this time, am setting thee face to face.

Having read this, repeat it many times in the ear of the person
dying, even before the expiration hath ceased, so as to impress it on
the mind [of the dying one].

If the expiration is about to cease, turn the dying one over on the
right side, which posture is called the ‘Lying Posture of a Lion’. The
throbbing of the arteries [on the right and left side of the throat] is to
be pressed.

If the person dying be disposed to sleep, or if the sleeping state
advances, that should be arrested, and the arteries pressed gently but
firmly.2 Thereby the vital—force will not be able to return from the
median—nerve3 and will be sure to pass out through the Brahmanic
aperture.1 Now the real setting—face—to—face is to be applied.

At this moment, the first [glimpsing] of the Bardo of the Clear Light
of Reality, which is the Infallible Mind of the Dharma—Kāya, is



experienced by all sentient beings.
The interval between the cessation of the expiration and the

cessation of the inspiration is the time during which the vital—force
remaineth in the median—nerve.2

The common people call this the state wherein the consciousness—
principle3 hath fainted away. The duration of this state is uncertain. [It
dependeth] upon the constitution, good or bad, and [the state of] the
nerves and vital—force. In those who have had even a little practical
experience of the firm, tranquil state of dkyāna, and in those who
have sound nerves, this state continueth for a long time.4

In the setting—face—to—face, the repetition [of the above address
to the deceased] is to be persisted in until a yellowish liquid beginneth
to appear from the various apertures of the bodily organs [of the
deceased].

In those who have led an evil life, and in those of unsound nerves,
the above state endureth only so long as would take to snap a finger.
Again, in some, it endureth as long as the time taken for the eating of
a meal.

In various Tantras it is said that this state of swoon endureth for
about three and one—half days. Most other [religious treatises] say
for four days; and that this setting—face—to—face with the Clear
Light ought to be persevered in [during the whole time].

The manner of applying [these directions] is:
If [when dying] one be by one’s own self capable [of diagnosing the

symptoms of death], use [of the knowledge] should have been made
ere this.1 If [the dying person be] unable to do so, then either the
guru> or a skishya, or a brother in the Faith with whom the one
[dying] was very intimate, should be kept at hand, who will vividly
impress upon the one [dying] the symptoms [of death] as they appear
in due order [repeatedly saying, at first] thus:2

Now the symptoms of earth sinking into water are come.3
When all the symptoms [of death] are about to be completed, then

enjoin upon [the one dying] this resolution, speaking in a low tone of
voice in the ear:



O nobly—born (or, if it be a priest, O Venerable Sir), let not thy
mind be distracted.

If it be a brother [in the Faith], or some other person, then call him
by name, and [say] thus:

O nobly—born, that which is called death being come to thee now,
resolve thus: * O this now is the hour of death. By taking advantage of
this death, I will so act, for the good of all sentient beings, peopling the
illimitable expanse of the heavens, as to obtain the Perfect
Buddhahood, by resolving on love and compassion towards [them, and
by directing my entire effort to] the Sole Perfection.’

Shaping the thoughts thus, especially at this time when the Dharma
—Kāya of Clear Light [in the state] after death can be realized for the
benefit of all sentient beings, know that thou art in that state; [and
resolve] that thou wilt obtain the best boon of the State of the Great
Symbol,1in which thou art, [as follows]:

‘Even if I cannot realize it, yet will I know this Bardo, and,
mastering the Great Body of Union in Bardo, will appear in whatever
[shape] will benefit [all beings] whomsoever:2I will serve all sentient
beings, infinite in number as are the limits of the sky.’

Keeping thyself unseparated from this resolution, thou shouldst try
to remember whatever devotional practices thou vvert accustomed to
perform during thy lifetime.1

In saying this, the reader shall put his lips close to the ear, and shall
repeat it distinctly, clearly impressing it upon the dying person so as to
prevent his mind from wandering even for a moment.

After the expiration hath completely ceased, press the nerve of
sleep firmly; and, a lāma, or a person higher or more learned than
thyself, impress in these words, thus:

Reverend Sir, now that thou art experiencing the Fundamental Clear
Light, try to abide in that state which now thou art experiencing.

And also in the case of any other person the reader shall set him
face—to—face thus :

O nobly—born (so—and—so), listen. Now thou art experiencing
the Radiance of the Clear Light of Pure Reality. Recognize it. O nobly
—born, thy present intellect,2 in real naturevoid, not formed into
anything as regards characteristics orcolour, naturally void, is the very



Reality, the All—Good.3

Thine own intellect, which is now voidness, yet not to be regarded as
of the voidness of nothingness, but as being the intellect itself,
unobstructed, shining, thrilling, and blissful, is the very consciousness,1

the All—good Buddha.2
Thine own consciousness, not formed into anything, in reality void,

and the intellect, shining and blissful,—these two,—are inseparable.
The union of them is the Dharma—Kāya state of Perfect
Enlightenment.3

Thine own consciousness, shining, void, and inseparable from the
Great Body of Radiance, hath no birth, nor death, and is the
Immutable Light—Buddha Amitābha.4

Knowing this is sufficient. Recognizing the voidness of thine own
intellect to be Buddhahood, and looking upon it as being thine own
consciousness, is to keep thyself in the [state of the] divine mind5 of
the Buddha.6

Repeat this distinctly and clearly three or [even] seven times. That
will recall to the mind [of the dying one] the former [i. e. when living]
setting—face—to—face by the guru. Secondly, it will cause the
naked consciousness to be recognized as the Clear Light; and, thirdly,
recognizing one’s own self [thus], one becometh permanently united
with the Dharma—Kāya and Liberation will be certain.1



[INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING
THE SECOND STAGE OF THE

CH1KHAI BARDO. THE
SECONDARY CLEAR LIGHT SEEN

IMMEDIATELY AFTER DEATH]
 

Thus the primary Clear Light is recognized and Liberation attained.
But if it be feared that the primary Clear Light hath not been
recognized, then [it can certainly be assumed] there is dawning [upon
the deceased] that called the secondary Clear Light, which dawneth in
somewhat more than a mealtime period after that the expiration hath
ceased.1

According to one’s good or bad karma, the vital—force floweth
down into either the right or left nerve and goeth out through any of
the apertures [of the body].2 Then cometh a lucid condition of the
mind.3

To say that the state [of the primary Clear Light] endureth for a
meal—time period [would depend upon] the good or bad condition of
the nerves and also whether there hath been previous practice or not
[in the setting—face—to—face].

When the consciousness—principle getteth outside [the body, it
sayeth to itself],i Am I dead, or am I not dead ?’ It cannot determine.
It seeth its relatives and connexions as it had been used to seeing them
before. It even heareth the wailings. The terrifying karmic illusions
have not yet dawned. Nor have the frightful apparitions or
experiences caused by the Lords of Death4 yet come.

During this interval, the directions are to be applied [by the lāma or
reader]:

There are those [devotees] of the perfected stage and of the



visualizing stage. If it be one who was in the perfected stage, then call
him thrice by name and repeat over and over again the above
instructions of setting—face—to—face with the Clear Light. If it be
one who was in the visualizing stage, then read out to him the
introductory descriptions and the text of the Meditation on his tutelary
deity,1 and then say,

O thou of noble—birth, meditate upon thine own tutelary deity.—
[Here the deity’s name is to be mentioned by the reader.2] Do not be
distracted. Earnestly concentrate thy mind upon thy tutelary deity.
Meditate upon him as if he were the reflection of the moon in water,
apparent yet in—existent [in itself]. Meditate upon him as if he were a
being with a physical body.

So saying, [the reader will] impress it.
If [the deceased be] of the common folk, say,
Meditate upon the Great Compassionate Lord.3
By thus being set—face—to—face even those who would not be

expected to recognize the Bardo [unaided] are undoubtedly certain to
recognize it.

Persons who while living had been set face to face [with the
Reality] by a guru yet who have not made themselves familiar with it,
will not be able to recognize the Bardo clearly by themselves. Either a
guru or a brother in the Faith will have to impress vividly such
persons.4

There may be even those who have made themselves familiar with
the teachings, yet who, because of the violence of the disease causing
death, may be mentally unable to withstand illusions. For such, also,
this instruction is absolutely necessary.

Again [there are those] who, although previously familiar with the
teachings, have become liable to pass into the miserable states of
existence, owing to breach of vows or failure to perform essential
obligations honestly. To them, this [instruction] is indispensable.

If the first stage of the Bardo hath been taken by the forelock, that
is best. But if not, by application of this distinct recalling [to the
deceased], while in the second stage of the Bardo, his intellect is
awakened and attaineth liberation.



While on the second stage of the Bardo, one’s body is of the nature
of that called the shining illusory—body.1

Not knowing whether [he be] dead or not, [a state of] lucidity
cometh [to the deceased].2 If the instructions be successfully applied
to the deceased while he is in that state, then, by the meeting of the
Mother—Reality and the Offspring—Reality,3 karma controlleth not.4
Like the sun’s rays, for example, dispelling the darkness, the Clear
Light on the Path dispelleth the power of karma.

1 The Knower2 hovereth within those places to which its activities
had been limited. If at this time this special teaching be applied
efficiently, then the purpose will be fulfilled; for the karmic illusions
will not have come yet, and, therefore, he [the deceased] cannot be
turned hither and thither [from his aim of achieving Enlightenment].



[PART II]
[THE BARDO OF THE

EXPERIENCING OF REALITY]
 



[INTRODUCTORY INSTRUCTIONS
CONCERNING THE

EXPERIENCING OF REALITY
DURING THE THIRD STAGE OF

THE BARDO, CALLED THE
CHÖNYID BARDO, WHEN THE

KARMIC APPARITIONS APPEAR]
 

But even though the Primary Clear Light be not recognized, the
Clear Light of the second Bardo being recognized, Liberation will be
attained. If not liberated even by that, then that called the third Bardo
or the Chónyid Bardo dawneth.

In this third stage of the Bardo, the karmic illusions come to shine.
It is very important that this Great Setting—face—to—face of the
Chonyid Bardo be read : it hath much power and can do much good*

About this time [the deceased] can see that the share of food is
being set aside, that the body is being stripped of its garments, that the
place of the sleeping—rug 13 being swept;3can hear all the weeping
and wailing of his friends and relatives, and, although he can see them
and can hear them calling upon him, they cannot hear him calling upon
them, so he goeth away displeased.

At that time, sounds, lights, and rays—all three—are experienced.
These awe, frighten, and terrify, and cause much fatigue. At this
moment, this setting—face—to—face with the Bardo [during the
experiencing] of Reality is to be applied. Call the deceased by name,
and correctly and distinctly explain to him, as follows :

O nobly—born, listen with full attention, without being distracted:
There are six states of Bardo, namely: the natural state of Bardo
while in the womb;1 the Bardo of the dream—state;2 the Bardo of



ecstatic equilibrium, while in deep meditation;3 the Bardo of the
moment of death;4 the Bardo [during the experiencing] of Reality;6the
Bardo of the inverse process of sangsāric existence.6These are the
six.

O nobly—born, thou wilt experience three Bardos, the Bardo of
the moment of death, the Bardo [during the experiencing] of Reality,
and the Bardo while seeking rebirth. Of these three, up to yesterday,
thou hadst experienced the Bardo of the moment of death. Although
the Clear Light of Reality dawned upon thee, thou wert unable to hold
on, and so thou hast to wander here. Now henceforth thou art going to
experience the [other] two, the Chónyid Bardo and the Sidpa Bardo.

Thou wilt pay undistracted attention to that with which I am about
to set thee face to face, and hold on:

O nobly—born, that which is called death hath now come. Thou art
departing from this world, but thou art not the only one; [death]
cometh to all. Do not cling, in fondness and weakness, to this life.
Even though thou clingest out of weakness, thou hast not the power to
remain here. Thou wilt gain nothing more than wandering in this
Sangsāra} Be not attached [to this world]; be not weak. Remember
the Precious Trinity.2

O nobly—born, whatever fear and terror may come to thee in the
Chönyid Bardo forget not these words; and, bearing their meaning at
heart, go forwards: in them lieth the vital secret of recognition:

‘Alas! when the Uncertain Experiencing of Reality is
dawning upon me here,3

With every thought of fear or terror or awe for all
[apparitional appearances] set aside,

May I recognize whatever [visions] appear, as the reflections
of mine own consciousness;



May I know them to be of the nature of apparitions in the
Bardo:

When at this all—important moment [of opportunity] of
achieving a great end,

May I not fear the bands of Peaceful and Wrathful [Deities],
mine own thought—forms.4’

Repeat thou these [verses] clearly, and remembering their
significance as thou repeatest them, go forwards, [O nobly—born].
Thereby, whatever visions of awe or terror appear, recognition is
certain; and forget not this vital secret art lying therein.

O nobly—born, when thy body and mind were separating, thou
must have experienced a glimpse of the Pure Truth, subtle, sparkling,
bright, dazzling, glorious, and radiantly awesome, in appearance like a
mirage moving across a landscape in spring—time in one continuous
stream of vibrations. Be not daunted thereby, nor terrified, nor awed.
That is the radiance of thine own true nature. Recognize it.

From the midst of that radiance, the natural sound of Reality,
reverberating like a thousand thunders simultaneously sounding, will
come. That is the natural sound of thine own real self. Be not daunted
thereby, nor terrified, nor awed.

The body which thou hast now is called the thought—body of
propensities.1 Since thou hast not a material body of flesh and blood,
whatever may come,—sounds, lights, or rays, —are, all three, unable
to harm thee: thou art incapable of dying. It is quite sufficient for thee
to know that these apparitions are thine own thought—forms.
Recognize this to be the Bardo.

O nobly—born, if thou dost not now recognize thine ownthought—
forms, whatever of meditation or of devotion thoumayst have
performed while in the human world—if thou hastnot met with this
present teaching—the lights will dauntthee, the sounds will awe thee,
and the rays will terrify thee.Shouldst thou not know this all—
important key to the teachings, —not being able to recognize the
sounds, lights, andrays,—thou wilt have to wander in the Sangsāra.



[THE DAWNING OF THE
PEACEFUL DEITIES, FROM THE

FIRST TO THE SEVENTH DAY]
 

[Assuming that the deceased is karmically bound—as the average
departed one is—to pass through the forty—nine days of the Bardo
existence, despite the very frequent settings—face—to—face, the
daily trials and dangers which he must meet and attempt to triumph
over, during the first seven days, wherein dawn the Peaceful Deities,
are next explained to him in detail; the first day, judging from the text,
being reckoned from the time in which normally he would be expected
to wake up to the fact that he is dead and on the way back to rebirth,
or about three and one—half to four days after death.]

[THE FIRST DAY]
 

O nobly—born, thou hast been in a swoon during the last three and
one—half days. As soon as thou art recovered from this swoon, thou
wilt have the thought, ‘What hath happened!’

Act so that thou wilt recognize the Bardo. At that time, all the
Sangsāra will be in revolution ;1 and the phenomenal appearances
that thou wilt see then will be the radiances and deities.2 The whole
heavens will appear deep blue.

Then, from the Central Realm, called the Spreading Forth of the
Seed,3 the Bhagavān Vairochana,4 white in colour, and seated upon a
lion—throne, bearing an eight—spoked wheel in his hand, and
embraced by the Mother of the Space of Heaven,1 will manifest
himself to thee.

It is the aggregate of matter resolved into its primordial state which
is the blue light.2

The Wisdom of the Dharma—Dhåtu, blue in colour, shining,



transparent, glorious, dazzling, from the heart of Vairochana as the
Father—Mother, ‘1 will shoot forth and strike against thce with a light
so radiant that thou wilt scarcely be able to look at it.

Along with it, there will also shine a dull white light from the devas
which will strike against thee in thy front.

Thereupon, because of the power of bad karma, the glorious blue
light of the Wisdom of the Dharma—Dhåtu will produce in thee fear
and terror, and thou wilt [wish to] flee from it. Thou wilt beget a
fondness for the dull white light of the devas.

At this stage, thou must not be awed by the divine blue light which
will appear shining, dazzling, and glorious; and be not startled by it.
That is the light of the Tathāgata4called the Light of the Wisdom of the
Dharma—Dkātu. Put thy faith in it, believe in it firmly, and pray unto
it, thinking in thy mind that it is the light proceeding from the heart of
the Bhagavān Vairochana coming to receive thee while in the
dangerous ambuscade of the Bardo. That light is the light of the grace
of Vairochana.

Be not fond of the dull white light of the devas Be not attached [to
it]; be not weak. If thou be attached to it, thou wilt wander into the
abodes of the devds and be drawn into the whirl of the Six Lokas.
That is an interruption to obstruct thee on the Path of Liberation. Look
not at it. Look at the bright blue light in deep faith. Put thy whole
thought earnestly upon Vairochana and repeat after me this prayer:

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsāra, because of intense
stupidity,

On the radiant light—path of the Dhartna—Dhātu Wisdom
May [I] be led by the Bhagavān Vairochana, May the Divine
Mother of Infinite Space be [my] rearguard ; May [I] be led
safely across the fearful ambush of the Bardo;

May [I] be placed in the state of the All—Perfect Buddha—
hood.’2



Praying thus, in intense humble faith, [thou] wilt merge, in halo of
rainbow light, into the heart of Vairochana, and obtain Buddhahood in
the Satnbhoga—Kāya, in the Central Realm of the Densely—
Packed.3

[THE SECOND DAY]
 

But if, notwithstanding this setting—face—to—face, through power
of anger or obscuring karma one should be startled at the glorious
light and flee, or be overcome by illusions, despite the prayer, on the
Second Day, Vajra—Sattva and his attendant deities, as well as one’s
evil deeds [meriting] Hell, will come to receive one.

Thereupon the setting—face—to—face is, calling the deceased by
name, thus:

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. On the Second Day the pure
form of water will shine as a white light. At that time, from the deep
blue Eastern Realm of Pre—eminent Happiness, the Bhagavān
Akshobhya [as] Vajra—Sattva,1 blue in colour, holding in his hand a
five—pronged dorje* seated upon an elephant—throne, and
embraced by the Mother Māmakf3, will appear to thee, attended by
the Bodhisattvas Kshiti—garbha4 and Maitreya,5 with the female
Bodhisattvas, Lasema and Pushpema.6 These six Bodhic deities will
appear to thee.

The aggregate of thy principle of consciousness,1 being in its pure
form—which is the Mirror—like Wisdom—will shine as a bright,
radiant white light, from the heart of Vajra—Sattva, the Father—
Mother,2 with such dazzling brilliancy and transparency that thou wilt
scarcely be able to look at it, [and] will strike against thee. And a dull,
smoke—coloured light from Hell will shine alongside the light of the
Mirror—like Wisdom and will [also] strike against thee.

Thereupon, through the power of anger, thou wilt beget fear and be
startled at the dazzling white light and wilt [wish to] flee from it; thou
wilt beget a feeling of fondness for the dull smoke—coloured light
from Hell. Act then so that thou wilt not fear that bright, dazzling,
transparent white light. Know it to be Wisdom. Put thy humble and



earnest faith in it That is the light of the grace of the Bhagavān Vajra
—Sattva. Think, with faith, * I will take refuge in it’; and pray.

That is the Bhagavān Vajra—Sattva coming to receive thee and to
save thee from the fear and terror of the Bardo. Believe in it; for it is
the hook of the rays of grace of Vajra—Sattva.4

Be not fond of the dull, smoke—coloured light from Hell. That is
the path which openeth out to receive thee because of the power of
accumulated evil karma from violent anger. If thou be attracted by it,
thou wilt fall into the Hell—Worlds; and, falling therein, thou wilt have
to endure unbearable misery, whence there is no certain time of
getting out. That being an interruption to obstruct thee on the Path of
Liberation, look not at it; and avoid anger.4 Be not attracted by it; be
not weak. Believe in the dazzling bright white light; [and] putting thy
whole heart earnestly upon the Bhagavān Vajra—Sattva, pray thus :

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsāra because of the power of
violent anger,

On the radiant light—path of the Mirror—like Wisdom,

May [I] be led by the Bhagavān Vajra—Sattva,

May the Divine Mother Māmaki be [my] rear—guard;

May [I] be led safely across the fearful ambush of the
Bardo;

And may [I] be placed in the state of the All—perfect
Buddhahood.1

Praying thus, in intense humble faith, thou wilt merge, in rainbow
light, into the heart of the Bhagavān Vajra—Sattva and obtain
Buddhahood in the Sambhoga—Kaya> in the Eastern Realm called
Pre—eminently Happy.



[THE THIRD DAY]

 
Yet, even when set face to face in this way, some persons, because

of obscurations from bad karma, and from pride, although the hook of
the rays of grace [striketh against them] flee from it. [If one be one of
them], then, on the Third Day, the Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava1 and
his accompanying deities, along with the light—path from the human
world, will come to receive one simultaneously.

Again, calling the deceased by name, the setting—face—to—face
is thus:

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. On the Third Day the primal
form of the element earth will shine forth as a yellow light. At that
time, from the Southern Realm Endowed with Glory, the Bhagavān
Ratna—Sambhava, yellow in colour, bearing a jewel in his hand,
seated upon a horse—throne and embraced by the Divine Mother
Sangyay—Chanma,1 will shine upon thee.

The two Bodhisattvas, ākāsha—Garbha3 and Samanta—Bhadra,3

attended by the two female Bodhisattvas, Mahlaima and Dhupema,4
—in all, six Bodhic forms,—will come to shine from amidst a rainbow
halo of light. The aggregate of touch in its primal form, as the yellow
light of the Wisdom of Equality, dazzlingly yellow, glorified with orbs
having satellite orbs of radiance, so clear and bright that the eye can
scarcely look upon it, will strike against thee. Side by side with it, the
dull bluish—yellow light from the human [world] will also strike
against thy heart, along with the Wisdom light.

Thereupon, through the power of egotism, thou wilt beget a fear for
the dazzling yellow light and wilt [wish to] flee from it. Thou wilt be
fondly attracted towards the dull bluish—yellow light from the human
[world].

At that time do not fear that bright, dazzling—yellow, transparent
light, but know it to be Wisdom ; in that state, keeping thy mind
resigned, trust in it earnestly and humbly. If thou knowest it to be the
radiance of thine own intellect—although thou exertest not thy humility
and faith and prayer to it— the Divine Body and Light will merge into
thee inseparably, and thou wilt obtain Buddhahood.



If thou dost not recognize the radiance of thine own intellect, think,
with faith,4 It is the radiance of the grace of the Bhagaván Ratna—
Sambhava; I will take refuge in it’; and pray. It is the hook of the
grace—rays of the Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava; believe in it.

Be not fond of that dull bluish—yellow light from the human
[world]. That is the path of thine accumulated propensities of violent
egotism come to receive thce. If thou art attracted by it, thou wilt be
born in the human world and have to suffer birth, age, sickness, and
death; and thou wilt have no chance of getting out of the quagmire of
worldly existence. That is an interruption to obstruct thy path of
liberation. Therefore, look not upon it, and abandon egotism, abandon
propensities; be not attracted towards it; be not weak. Act so as to
trust in that bright dazzling light. Put thine earnest thought, one—
pointedly, upon the Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava; and pray thus:

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsāra because of the
power of violent egotism,

On the radiant light—path of the Wisdom of Equality,

May [I] be led by the Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava;

May the Divine Mother, She—of—the—Buddha—Eye, be
[my] rear—guard;

May [I] be led safely across the fearful ambush of the
Bardo;

And may [I] be placed in the state of the All—Perfect
Buddhahood.’

By praying thus, with deep humility and faith, thou wilt merge into
the heart of the Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava, the Divine Father—
Mother, in halo of rainbow light, and attain Buddhahood in the



Satnbhoga—Kaya in the Southern Realm Eiidowed with Glory.

[THE FOURTH DAY]
 

By thus being set face to face, however weak the mental faculties
may be, there is no doubt of one’s gaining Liberation. Yet, though so
often set face to face, there are classes of men who, having created
much bad kartna, or having failed in observance of vows, or, their lot
[for higher development] being altogether lacking, prove unable to
recognize: their obscurations and evil karma from covetousness and
miserliness produce awe of the sounds and radiances, and they flee.
[If one be of these classes], then, on the Fourth Day, the Bhagavān
Amitābha1 and his attendant deities, together with the light—path from
the Preta—loka proceeding from miserliness and attachment, will
come tö receive one simultaneously.

Again the setting—face—to—face is, calling the deceased by
name, thus:

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. On the Fourth Daythe red
light, which is the primal form of the element fire, willshine. At that
time, from the Red Western Realm of Happiness,2 the Bhagavān
Buddha Amitābha, red in colour, bearinga lotus in his hand, seated
upon a peacock—throne and embraced by the Divine Mother
Gökarmo,2 will shine upon thee,[together with] the Bodhisattvas
Chenrazee* and Jampal,4attended by the female Bodhisattvas
Ghirdhima 5 and āloke.5The six bodies of Enlightenment will shine
upon thee fromamidst a halo of rainbow light.

The primal form of the aggregate of feelings as the red light of the
All—Discriminating Wisdom, glitteringly red, glorified with orbs and
satellite orbs, bright, transparent, glorious and dazzling, proceeding
from the heart of the Divine Father—Mother Amitābha, will strike
against thy heart [so radiantly] that thou wilt scarcely be able to look
upon it. Fear it not.

Along with it, a dull red light from the Preta—loka coming side by
side with the Light of Wisdom, will also shine upon thee. Act so that
thou shalt not be fond of it. Abandon attachment [and] weakness [for
it].



At that time, through the influence of intense attachment, thou wilt
become terrified by the dazzling red light, and wilt [wish to] flee from
it. And thou wilt beget a fondness for that dull red light of the Preta—
loka.

At that time, be not afraid of the glorious, dazzling, transparent,
radiant red light. Recognizing it as Wisdom, keeping thine intellect in
the state of resignation, thou wilt merge [into it] inseparably and attain
Buddhahood.

If thou dost not recognize it, think, * It is the rays of the grace of
the Bhagavān Amitābha, and I will take refuge in it’; and, trusting
humbly in it, pray unto it. That is the hook—rays of the grace of the
Bhagavān Amitābha, Trust in it humbly; flee not. Even if thou fleest, it
will follow thee inseparably [from thyself]. Fear it not. Be not
attracted towards the dull red light of the Preta—loka. That is the
light—path proceeding from the accumulations of thine intense
attachment [to sangsāric existence] which hath come to receive thee.
If thou be attached thereto, thou wilt fall into the World of Unhappy
Spirits and suffer unbearable misery from hunger and thirst. Thou wilt
have no chance of gaining Liberation [therein].1 That dull red light is
an interruption to obstruct thee on the Path of Liberation. Be not
attached to it, and abandon habitual propensities. Be not weak. Trust
in the bright dazzling red light. In the Bhagavān Amitābha, the Father
—Mother, put thy trust one—pointedly and pray thus:

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsāra because of the
power of intense attachment,

On the radiant light—path of the Discriminating Wisdom

May [I] be led by the Bhagavān Amitābha;

May the Divine Mother, She—of—White—Raiment, be [my]
rear—guard;



May [I] be safely led across the dangerous ambush of the
Bardo;

And may [I] be placed in the state of the All—Perfect
Buddhahood.’

By praying thus, humbly and earnestly, thou wilt merge into the
heart of the Divine Father—Mother, the Bhagavān Amitābha, in halo
of rainbow—light, and attain Buddhahood in the Sambhoga—Kāya>
in the Western Realm named Happy.

[THE FIFTH DAY]
 

It is impossible that one should not be liberated thereby. Yet, though
thus set face to face, sentient beings, unable through long association
with propensities to abandon propensities, and, through bad karma and
jealousy, awe and terror being produced by the sounds and radiances
—the hook—rays of grace failing to catch hold of them—wander
down also to the Fifth Day. [If one be such a sentient being],
thereupon the Bhagavān Amogha—Siddhi,1 with his attendant deities
and the light and rays of his grace, will come to receive one. A light
proceeding from the Asura—loka, produced by the evil passion of
jealousy, will also come to receive one.

The setting—face—to—face at that time is, calling the deceased
by name, thus:

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. On the Fifth Day, the green
light of the primal form of the element air will shine upon thee. At that
time, from the Green Northern Realm of Successful Performance of
Best Actions, the Bhagavān Buddha Amogha—Siddhi, green in colour,
bearing a crosscd—dorje in hand,1 seated upon a sky—traversing
Harpy—throne,2 embraced by the Divine Mother, the Faithful Dölma,3
will shine upon thee, with his attendants,—the two Bodhisattvas Chag
—na—Dorje4 and Dibpanamsel,5 attended by two female
Bodhisattvas, Gandhema6 and Nidhema.7 These six Bodhic formsi
from amidst a halo of rainbow light, will come to shine.

The primal form of the aggregate of volition, shining as the green



light of the All—Performing Wisdom, dazzlingly green, transparent and
radiant, glorious and terrifying, beautified with orbs surrounded by
satellite orbs of radiance, issuing from the heart of the Divine Father
—Mother Amogha—Siddhi, green in colour, will strike against thy
heart [so wondrously bright] that thou wilt scarcely be able to look at
it. Fear it not. That is the natural power of the wisdom of thine own
intellect. Abide in the state of great resignation of impartiality.

Along with it [i. e. the green light of the All—Performing Wisdom],
a light of dull green colour from the Asura—loka, produced from the
cause of the feeling of jealousy, coming side by side with the Wisdom
Rays, will shine upon thee. Meditate upon it with impartiality,—with
neither repulsion nor attraction. Be not fond of it: if thou art of low
mental capacity, be not fond of it.

Thereupon, through the influence of intense jealousy,1thou wilt be
terrified at the dazzling radiance of the green light and wilt [wish to]
flee from it; and thou wilt beget a fondness for that dull green light of
the Asura—loka. At that time fear not the glorious and transparent,
radiant and dazzling green light, but know it to be Wisdom ; and in that
state allow thine intellect to rest in resignation. Or else [think], ‘It is
the hook—rays of the light of grace of the Bhagavān Amogha—
Siddhi, which is the All—Performing Wisdom*. Believe [thus] on it.
Flee not from it.

Even though thou shouldst flee from it, it will follow thee
inseparably [from thyself]. Fear it not. Be not fond of that dull green
light of the Asura—loka. That is the kartnic path of acquired intense
jealousy, which hath come to receive thee. If thou art attracted by it,
thou wilt fall into the Asura—loka and have to engage in unbearable
miseries of quarrelling and warfare.2 [That is an] interruption to
obstruct thy path of liberation. Be not attracted by it. Abandon thy
propensities. Be not weak. Trust in the dazzling green radiance, and
putting thy whole thought one—pointedly upon the Divine Father—
Mother, the Bhagavān Amogha—Siddhi, pray thus: ‘Alas! when
wandering in the Sangsāra because of the power of intense jealousy,

On the radiant light—path of the All—Performing Wisdom
May [I] be led by the Bhagavān Amogha—Siddhi; May the



Divine Mother, the Faithful Tāra, be [my] rearguard ; May [I] be
led safely across the dangerous ambush of the Bardo ; And may
[I] be placed in the state of the All—Perfect Buddhahood.’

By praying thus with intense faith and humility, thou wilt merge into
the heart of the Divine Father—Mother, the Bhagavān Amogha—
Siddhi, in halo of rainbow light, and attain Buddhahood in the
Sambkoga—Kāya in the Northern Realm of Heaped—up Good
Deeds.1

[THE SIXTH DAY]
 

Being thus set face to face at various stages, however weak one’s
kartnic connexions may be, one should have recognized in one or the
other of them ; and where one has recognized in any of them it is
impossible not to be liberated. Yet, although set face to face so very
often in that manner, one long habituated to strong propensities and
lacking in familiarity with, and pure affection for, Wisdom, may be led
backwards by the power of one’s own evil inclinations despite these
many introductions. The hook—rays of the light of grace may not be
able to catch hold of one: one may still wander downwards because of
one’s begetting the feeling of awe and terror of the lights and rays.

Thereupon all the Divine Fathers—Mothers of the Five Orders [of
Dhyānī Buddhas] with their attendants will come to shine upon one
simultaneously. At the same time, the lights proceeding from the Six
Lokas will likewise come to shine upon one simultaneously.

The setting—face—to—face for that is, calling the deceased by
name, thus:

O nobly—born, until yesterday each of the Five Orders of



 

THE GREAT MANDALA OF THE PEACEFUL DEITIES
Described on pages xxviii—xxix, 1x8—22, 217—220

 



 

THE TIBETAN WHEEL OF THE LAW
Described on page xxxiii

Deities had shone upon thee, one by one; and thou hadst been set face
to face, but, owing to the influence of thine evil propensities, thou wert
awed and terrified by them and hast remained here till now.

If thou hadst recognized the radiances of the Five Orders of
Wisdom to be the emanations from thine own thought—forms, ere this
thou wouldst have obtained Buddhahood in the Sambhoga—Kāya)
through having been absorbed into the halo of rainbow light in one or
another of the Five Orders of Buddhas. But now look on
undistractedly. Now the lights of all Five Orders, called the Lights of
the Union of Four Wisdoms,1 will come to receive thee. Act so as to
know them.

O nobly—born, on this the Sixth Day, the four colours of the primal
states of the four elements [water, earth, fire, air] will shine upon thee
simultaneously. At that time, from the Central Realm of the Spreading
Forth of Seed, the Buddha2Vairochana, the Divine Father—Mather,
with the attendant



[deities], will come to shine upon thee. From the Eastern Realm of Pre
—eminent Happiness, the Buddha Vajra—Sattva, the Divine Father—
Mother, with the attendant [deities] will come to shine upon thee.
From the Southern Realm endowed with Glory, the Buddha Ratna—
Sambhava, the Divine Father—Mother, with the attendant [deities]
will come to shine upon thee, From the Happy Western Realm|1 of
Heaped—up Lotuses, the Buddha Amitābha, the Divine Father—
Mother, along with the attendant [deities] will come to shine upon
thee. From the Northern Realm of Perfected Good Deeds, the
Buddha Amogha—Siddhi, the Divine Father—Mother, along with the
attendants will come, amidst a halo of rainbow light, to shine upon |
thee at this very moment.

O nobly—born, on the outer circle of these five pair of Dhyānl
Buddhas, the [four] Door—Keepers, the Wrathful[Ones]: the
Victorious One2 the Destroyer of the Lordof Death,3 the Horse—
necked King,4 the Urn of Nectar;5 with the four female Door—
keepers: the Goad—Bearer,6 theNoose—Bearer,7 the Chain—
Bearer,8 and the Bell—Bearer; 9along with the Buddha of the Devas,
named the One of Supreme Power,1 the Buddha of the Asuras named
[He of] Strong Texture,2 the Buddha of Mankind, named the Lion of
the Shākyas, the Buddha of the brute kingdom, named the Unshakable
Lion, the Buddha of the Pre tas, named the One of Flaming Mouth,
and the Buddha of the Lower World, named the King of Truth:3—
[these], the Eight Father—Mother Door—keepers and the Six
Teachers, the Victorious Ones—will come to shine, too.

The All—Good Father, and the All—Good Mother,4 the Great
Ancestors of all the Buddhas: Samanta—Bhadra [and Samanta—
Bhadrā], the Divine Father and the Divine Mother— these two, also
will come to shine.

These forty—two perfectly endowed deities, issuing from within thy
heart, being the product of thine own pure love, will come to shine.
Know them.

O nobly—born, these realms are not come from somewhere outside
[thyself]. They come from within the four divisions of thy heart,
which, including its centre, make the five directions. They issue from



within there, and shine upon thee. The

adeities, too, are not come from somewhere else: they exist from
eternity within the faculties of thine own intellect1Know them to be of
that nature.

O nobly—born, the size of all these deities is not large, not small,
[but] proportionate. [They have] their ornaments, their colours, their
sitting postures, their thrones, and the emblems that each holds.

These deities are formed into groups of five pairs, each group of
five being surrounded by a fivefold circle of radiances, the male
Bodhisattvas partaking of the nature of the Divine Fathers, and the
female Bodhisattvas partaking of the nature of the Divine Mothers.
All these divine conclaves will come to shine upon thee in one
complete conclave.2 They are thine own tutelary deities.3 Know them
to be such.

O nobly—born, from the hearts of the Divine Fathers and Mothers
of the Five Orders, the rays of light of the Four Wisdoms united,
extremely clear and fine, like the rays of the sun spun into threads, will
come and shine upon thee and strike against thy heart.

On that path of radiance there will come to shine glorious orbs of
light, blue in colour, emitting rays, the Dkarma—Dhåtu Wisdom
[itself], each appearing like an inverted turquoise cup, surrounded by
similar orbs, smaller in size, glorious and dazzling, radiant and
transparent, each made more glorious with five yet smaller [satellite]
orbs dotted round about with five starry spots of light of the same
nature, leaving neither the centre nor the borders [of the blue light—
path] unglorified by the orbs and the smaller [satellite] orbs.

From the heart of Vajra—Sattva, the white light—path of the
Mirror—like Wisdom, white and transparent, glorious and dazzling,
glorious and terrifying, made more glorious with orbs surrounded by
smaller orbs of transparent and radiant light upon it, each like an
inverted mirror, will come to shine.

From the heart of Ratna—Sambhava, the yellow light—path of the
Wisdom of Equality, [glorified] with yellow orbs [of radiance], each
like an inverted gold cup, surrounded by smaller orbs, and these with
yet smaller orbs, will come to shine.

From the heart of Amitābha, the transparent, bright red light—path



of the Discriminating Wisdom, upon which are orbs, like inverted coral
cups, emitting rays of Wisdom, extremely bright and dazzling, each
glorified with five [satellite] orbs of the same nature,—leaving neither
the centre nor the borders [of the red light—path] unglorified with
orbs and smaller satellite orbs,—will come to shine.

These will come to shine against thy heart simultaneously.1
O nobly—born, all those are the radiances of thine own intellectual

faculties come to shine. They have not come from any other place. Be
not attracted towards them; be not weak; be not terrified ; but abide in
the mood of non— thought—formation.2 In that state all the forms
and radiances will merge into thyself, and Buddhahood will be
obtained.

The green light—path of the Wisdom of Perfected Actions will not
shine upon thee, because the Wisdom—faculty of thine intellect hath
not been perfectly developed.

O nobly—born, those are called the Lights of the Four

Wisdoms United, [whence proceeds that] which is called the Inner
Path through Vajra—Sattva.1

At that time, thou must remember the teachings of the setting—
face—to—face which thou hast had from thy guru. If thou hast
remembered the purport of the settings—face—to—face, thou wilt
have recognized all these lights which have shone upon thee, as being
the reflection of thine own inner light, and, having recognized them as
intimate friends, thou wilt have believed in them and have understood
[them at] the meeting, as a son understandeth his mother.

And believing in the unchanging nature of the pure and holy Truth,
thou wilt have had produced in thee the tranquil—flowing Santādhi]
and, having merged into the body of the perfectly evolved intellect,
thou wilt have obtained Buddhahood in the Sambhoga—Kāya whence
there is no return.

O nobly—born, along with the radiances of Wisdom, the impure
illusory lights of the Six Lokas will also come to shine. If it be asked,
‘What are they ?’ [they are] a dull white light from the devas a dull
green light from the asuras a dull yellow light from human beings, a



dull blue light from the brutes, a dull reddish light from the pretas> and
a dull smoke—coloured light from Hell.2 These six thus will come to
shine, along with the six radiances of Wisdom ; whereupon, be not
afraid of nor be attracted towards any, but allow thyself to rest in the
non—thought condition.

If thou art frightened by the pure radiances of Wisdom and
attracted by the impure lights of the Six Lokas, then thou wilt assume
a body in any of the Six Lokas and suffer sang—sāric miseries; and
thou wilt never be emancipated from the Ocean of Sangsāra,
wherein thou wilt be whirled round and round and made to taste of the
sufferings thereof.

O nobly—born, if thou art one who hath not obtained the select
words of the guru, thou wilt have fear of the pure radiances of
Wisdom and of the deities thereof. Being thus frightened, thou wilt be
attracted towards the impure sangsāric objects. Act not so. Humbly
trust in the dazzling pure radiances of Wisdom. Frame thy mind to
faith, and think, * The compassionate radiances of Wisdom of the Five
Orders of Buddhasl have come to take hola of me out of compassion ;
I take refuge in them,’

Not yielding to attraction towards the illusory lights of the Six Lokas
but devoting thy whole mind one—pointedly towards the Divine
Fathers and Mothers, the Buddhas of the Five Orders, pray thus:

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsāra through the power of the five
virulent poisons,2

On the bright radiance—path of the Four Wisdoms united, May [I] be
led by the Five Victorious Conquerors, May the Five Orders of Divine
Mothers be [my] rearguard ; May [I] be rescued from the impure light
—paths of the Six Lokas ;

And, being saved from the ambuscades of the dread Bardo, May [I]
be placed within the five pure Divine Realms.1

By thus praying, one recognizeth one’s own inner light;3

and, merging one’s self therein, in at—one—ment, Buddhahood is



attained : through humble faith, the ordinary devotee cometh to know
himself, and obtaineth Liberation; even the most lowly, by the power
of the pure prayer, can close the doors of the Six Lokas, and, in
understanding the real meaning of the Four Wisdoms united, obtain
Buddhahood by the hollow pathway through Vajra—Sattva.1

Thus by being set face to face in that detailed manner, those who
are destined to be liberated will come to recognize [the Truth];a
thereby many will attain Liberation.

The worst of the worst, [those] of heavy evil karma, having not the
least predilection for any religion—and some who have failed in their
vows—through the power of karmic illusions, not recognizing,
although set face to face [with Truth], will stray downwards.

[THE SEVENTH DAY]

 
On the Seventh Day, the Knowledge—Holding Deities, from the

holy paradise realms, come to receive one. Simultaneously, the
pathway to the brute world, produced by the obscuring passion,
stupidity, also cometh to receive one.3 The setting—face—to—face at
that time is, calling the deceased by name, thus :

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. On the Seventh Daythe vari—
coloured radiance of the purified propensities will cometo shine.
Simultaneously, the Knowledge—Holding Deities,1from the holy
paradise realms, will come to receive one.

From the centre of the Circle [or Mandala], enhaloed in radiance
of rainbow light, the supreme Knowledge—Holding [Deity], the Lotus
Lord of Dance, the Supreme Knowledge—Holder Who Ripens
Karmic Fruits, radiant with all the five colours, embraced by the
[Divine] Mother, the Red Dakini* [he] holding a crescent knife and a
skull [filled] with blood,3dancing and making the mudrā of
fascination,4 [with his right hand held] aloft, will come to shine.

To the east of that Circle, the deity called the Earth—Abiding
Knowledge—Holder, white of colour, with radiant smiling



countenance, embraced by the White Dåkini, the [Divine] Mother,
[he] holding a crescent knife and a skull [filled] with blood, dancing
and making the mudrā of fascination, [with his right hand held] aloft,
will come to shine.

To the south of that Circle, the Knowledge—Holding Deity called
[He] Having Power Over Duration of Life, ydlow in colour, smiling
and radiant, embraced by the Yellow Dåkinl, the [Divine] Mother,
[he] holding a crescent knife and a skull

[filled] with blood, dancing and making the mildra of fascination, [with
his right hand held] aloft, will come to shine.

To the west of that Circle, the deity called the Knowledge—Holding
Deity of the Great Symbol,1 red of colour, smiling and radiant,
embraced by the Red Dākini the [Divine] Mother, [he] holding a
crescent—knife and a skull [filled] with blood, dancing and making the
mndrā of fascination, [with his right hand held] aloft, will come to
shine.

To the north of that Circle, the deity called the Self—Evolved
Knowledge—Holder, green of colour, with a half—angry, half—
smiling radiant countenance, embraced by the Green Dåkini, the
[Divine] Mother, [he] holding a crescent—knife and a skull [filled]
with blood, dancing and making the mudrā of fascination, [with his
right hand held] aloft, will come to shine.

In the Outer Circle, round about these Knowledge—Holders,
innumerable bands of dåkinis, — dåkinis of the eight places of
cremation, dåkinis of the four classes, dåkinis of the three abodes,
dåkinis of the thirty holy—places and of the twenty—four places of
pilgrimage,2—heroes, heroines, celestial warriors, and faith—
protecting deities, male and female, each bedecked with the six bone
—ornaments, having drums and thigh—bone trumpets, skull—timbrels,
banners of gigantic human[—like] hides,3 human—hide canopies,
human—hide bannerettes, fumes of human—fat incense, and
innumerable [other] kinds of musical instruments, filling [with music]
the whole world—systems and causing them to vibrate, to quake and
tremble with sounds so mighty as to daze one’s brain, and dancing
various measures, will come to receive the faithful and punish the
unfaithful.4



O nobly—born, five—coloured radiances, of the Wisdom of the
Simultaneously—Born,1 which are the purified propensities, vibrating
and dazzling like coloured threads, flashing, radiant, and transparent,
glorious and awe—inspiring, will issue from the hearts of the five chief
Knowledge—Hold ing Deities and strike against thy heart, so bright
that the eye cannot bear to look upon them.

At the same time, a dull blue light from the brute world will come to
shine along with the Radiances of Wisdom. Then, through the
influence of the illusions of thy propensities, thou wilt feel afraid of the
radiance of the five colours; and [wishing to] flee from it, thou wilt
feel attracted towards the dull light from the brute—world. Thereupon,
be not afraid of that brilliant radiance of five colours, nor terrified ; but
know the Wisdom to be thine own.

Within those radiances, the natural sound of the Truth will
reverberate like a thousand thunders. The sound will come with a
rolling reverberation, [amidst which] will be heard, 1 Slay! Slay!’ and
awe—inspiring mantras.21 Fear not. Flee not. Be not terrified. Know
them [i. e. these sounds] to be [of] the intellectual faculties of thine
own [inner] light.

Be not attracted towards the dull blue light of the brute—world ; be
not weak. If thou art attracted, thou wilt fall into the brute—world,
wherein stupidity predominates, and suffer the illimitable miseries of
slavery and dumbness and stupidness ;* and it will be a very long time
ere thou canst get out. Be not attracted towards it. Put thy faith in the
bright, dazzling, five—coloured radiance. Direct thy mind one—
pointedly towards the deities, the Knowledge—Holding Conquerors.
Think, one—pointedly, thus: ‘These Knowledge—Holding Deities, the
Heroes, and the Dākinis have come from the holy paradise realms to
receive me ; I supplicate them all: up to this day, although the Five
Orders of the Buddhas of the Three Times have all exerted the rays
of their grace and compassion, yet have I not been rescued by them.
Alas, for a being like me! May the Knowledge—Holding Deities not
let me go downwards further than this, but hold me with the hook of
their compassion, and lead me to the holy paradises.’

Thinking in that manner, one—pointedly, pray thus:



‘O ye Knowledge—Holding Deities, pray hearken unto me ;Lead me
on the Path, out of your great love.

When [I am] wandering in the Sangsāra> because of intensified
propensities,

On the bright light—path of the Simultaneously—born Wisdom

May the bands of Heroes, the Knowledge—Holders, lead me;

May the bands of the Mothers, the Dākinis, be [my] rearguard ;

May they save me from the fearful ambuscades of the Bardo,

And place me in the pure Paradise Realms.’
Praying thus, in deep faith and humility, there is no doubt that one

will be born within the pure Paradise Realms,2 after

being merged, in rainbow—light, into the heart of the Knowledge—
Holding Deities.

All the pandit classes, too, coming to recognize at this stage, obtain
liberation ; even those of evil propensities being sure to be liberated
here.

Here endeth the part of the Great Thodol concerned with the
setting—face—to—face of the Peaceful [Deities] of the Clwnyid
Bardo and the setting—face—to—face of the Clear Light of the
Chikhai Bardo.

[THE DAWNING OF THE WRATHFUL
DEITIES, FROM THE EIGHTH TO THE

FOURTEENTH DAY]

 

[INTRODUCTION]



 
Now the manner of the dawning of the Wrathful Deities is to be

shown.
In the above Bardo of the Peaceful [Deities] there were seven

stages of ambuscade. The setting—face—to—face at each stage
should have [caused the deceased] to recognize either at one or
another [stage] and to have been liberated.

Multitudes will be liberated by that recognition; [and] although
multitudes obtain liberation in that manner, the number of sentient
beings being great, evil karma powerful, obscurations dense,
propensities of too long standing, the Wheel of Ignorance and Illusion
becometh neither exhausted nor accelerated. Although [all be] set
face—to—face in such detail, there is a vast preponderance of those
who wander downwards unliberated.

Therefore, after the cessation [of the dawning] of the Peaceful and
the Knowledge—Holding Deities, who come to welcome one, the fifty
—eight flame—enhaloed, wrathful, blood—drinking deities come to
dawn, who are only the former Peaceful Deities in changed aspect—
according to the place [or psychic—centre of the Bardo—body of the
deceased whence they proceed] ; nevertheless, they will not resemble
them.1

This is the Bardo of the Wrathful Deities; and, they being
influenced by fear, terror, and awe,1 recognition becometh more
difficult. The intellect, gaining not in independence, passeth from one
fainting state to a round of fainting states. [Yet], if one but recognize a
little, it is easier to be liberated [at this stage]. If it be asked why ? [the
answer is] : Because of the dawning of the radiances—[which
produce] fear, terror, and awe—the intellect is undistractedly alert in
one—pointedness; that is why.2

If at this stage one do not meet with this kind of teaching, one’s
hearing [of religious lore]—although it be like an ocean [in its
vastness]—is of no avail. There are even discipline—holding abbots
[or bhikkhus\ and doctors in metaphysical discourses who err at this
stage, and, not recognizing, wander into the Sangsāra.

As for the common worldly folk, what need is there to mention
them ! By fleeing, through fear, terror, and awe, they fall over the
precipices into the unhappy worlds and suffer. But the least of the



least of the devotees of the mystic mantrayāna doctrines, as soon as
he sees these blood—drinking deities, will recognize them to be his
tutelary deities, and the meeting will be like that of human
acquaintances. He will trust them; and becoming merged into them, in
at—one—ment, will obtain Buddhahood.3

By having meditated on the description of these blood—drinking
deities, while in the human world, and by having performed some
worship or praise of them; or, at least, by having seen their painted
likenesses and their images, upon witnessing the dawning of the deities
at this stage, recognition of them will result, and liberation. In this lieth
the art.

Again, at the death of those discipline—holding abbots and doctors
in metaphysical discourses [who remain uninstructed in these Bardo
teachings], however assiduously they may have devoted themselves to
religious practices, and however clever they may have been in
expounding doctrines while in the human world, there will not come
any phenomenal signs such as rainbow—halo [at the funeral—pyre]
nor bone—reliques [from the ashes]. This is because when they lived
the mystic [or esoteric] doctrines were never held within their heart,
and because they had spoken contemptuously of them, and because
they were never acquainted [through initiation] with the deities of the
mystic [or esoteric] doctrines; thus, when these dawn on the Bardo,
they do not recognize them. Suddenly [seeing] what they had never
seen before, they view it as inimical; and, an antagonistic feeling being
engendered, they pass into the miserable states because of that.
Therefore, if the observers of the disciplines, and the metaphysicians,
have not in them the practices of the mystic [or esoteric] doctrines,
such signs as the rainbow—halo come not, nor are bone—reliques and
seed—like bones ever produced [from the bones of their funeral—
pyre]:l these are the reasons for it.

The least of the least of mantrayānic [devotees],—who may seem
to be of very unrefined manners, unindustrious, untactful, and who
may not live in accordance with his vows, and who in every way may
be inelegant in his habits, and even unable, perhaps, to carry the
practices of his teachings to a successful issue,—let no one feel
disrespect for nor doubt him, but pay reverence to the esoteric [or
mystic] doctrines [which he holdeth]. By that, alone, one obtaineth



liberation at this stage.
Even though the deeds [of one paying such reverence] may not

have been very elegant while in the human world, at his death there
will come at least one kind of sign, such as rainbow—radiance, bone
—images, and bone—reliques. This is because the esoteric [or
mystic] doctrines possess great gift—waves.1

[Those of, and] above, the mystic mantrayānic devotees of
ordinary [psychic development], who have meditated upon the
visualization and perfection processes and practised the essences [or
essence mantras\* need not wander down this far on the Chönyid
Bardo. As soon as they cease to breathe, they will be led into the pure
paradise realms by the Heroes and Heroines and the Knowledge—
Holders.3 As a sign of

this, the sky will be cloudless; they will merge into rainbow radiance;
there will be sun—showers, sweet scent of incense [in the air], music
in the skies, radiances; bone—reliques and images [from their funeral
—pyre].

Therefore, to the abbots [or discipline—holders], to the doctors, and
to those mystics who have failed in their vows, and to all the common
people, this Thödol is indispensable.1But those who have meditated
upon the Great Perfection and the Great Symbol2 will recognize the
Clear Light at the moment of death; and, obtaining the Dkanna—
Kāya, all of them will be such as not to need the reading of this
Thödol By recognizing the Clear Light at the moment of death, they
also will recognize the visions of the Peaceful and the Wrathful during
the Chönyid Bardo, and obtain the Sambhoga—Kāya\ or,
recognizing during the Sidpa Bardo, obtain the Nirmāna—Kāya; and,
taking birth on the higher planes, will, in the next rebirth, meet with this
Doctrine, and then enjoy the continuity of karma?

Therefore, this Thödol is the doctrine by which Buddhahood may
be attained without meditation; the doctrine liberating by the hearing
[of it] alone; the doctrine which leadeth beings of great evil karma on
the Secret Path; the doctrine which produceth differentiation
instantaneously [between those who are initiated into it and those who
are not]: being the profound doctrine which conferreth Perfect
Enlightenment instantaneously. Those sentient beings who have been



reached by it cannot go to the unhappy states.
This [doctrine] and the Tahdol [doctrine] *, when joined together

being like unto a mándala of gold inset with turquoise, combine them.
Thus, the indispensable nature of the Thödol being shown, there

now cometh the setting—face—to—face with the dawning of the
Wrathful [Deities] in the Bardo.

[THE EIGHTH DAY]

 

Again, calling the deceased by name, [address him] thus:

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. Not having been able to
recognize when the Peaceful [Deities] shone upon thee in the Bardo
above, thou hast come wandering thus far. Now, on the Eighth Day,
the blood—drinking Wrathful Deities will come to shine. Act so as to
recognize them without being distracted.



 

THE GREAT MANDALA OF THE KNOWLEDGE—
HOLDING AND WRATHFUL DEITIES

 
Described on pages xxix—xxx, 127—8, 217—20



THE DORJE
THE LAM AIC SCEPTRE

Described on page xxxiii
O nobly—born, the Great Glorious Buddha—Hcruka,1 dark—

brown of colour; with three heads, six hands, and fourfeet firmly
postured; the right [face] being white, the left,red, the central, dark—
brown; the body emitting flames ofradiance; the nine eyes widely
opened, in terrifying gaze ; theeyebrows quivering like lightning; the
protruding teethglistening and set over one another; giving vent to
sonorousutterances of ‘a—la—la’ and ‘ha—ha’, and piercing
whistlingsounds; the hair of a reddish—yellow colour, standing on
end,and emitting radiance; the heads adorned with dried
[human]skulls, and the [symbols of the] sun and moon; black
serpentsand raw [human] heads forming a garland for the body ;
thefirst of the right hands holding a wheel, the middle one, asword, the
last one, a battle—axe; the first of the left hands,a bell, the middle one,
a skull—bowl, the last one, a ploughshare; his body embraced by the
Mother, Buddha—Kroti—shaurima,2 her right hand clinging to his
neck and her leftputting to his mouth a red shell [filled with blood],



[making]a palatal sound like a crackling [and] a clashing sound, anda 
rumbling sound as loud as thunder; [emanating from the twodeities] 
radiant flames of wisdom, blazing from every hair—pore[of the body] 
and each containing a flaming (forje ; [the twodeities together thus], 
standing with [one] leg bent and [theother] straight and tense, on a
dais supported by hornedeagles,3 will come forth from within thine 
own brain and shinevividly upon thec. Fear that not Be not awed. 
Know itto be the embodiment of thine own intellect. As it is thineown 
tutelary deity, be not terrified. Be not afraid, for inreality it is the 
Bhagavān Vairochana, the Father—Mother.Simultaneously with the 
recognition, liberation will be obtained: if they be recognized, merging 
[thyself], in at—onc—

ment, into the tutelary deity, Buddhahood in the Sambhoga* Kāya will 
be won.

[THE NINTH DAY]

But if one flee from them, through awe and terror being begotten, 
then, on the Ninth Day, the blood—drinking [deities] of the Vajra 
Order will come to receive one. Thereupon, the setting—face—to—
face is, calling the deceased by name, thus :

O nobly—born, listen undistractcdly. [He] of the blood—drinking 
Vajra Order named the Bhaavfui Vajra—Heruka, dark—blue in 
colour; with three faces, six hands, and four feet firmly postured; in 
the first right hand [holding] a dorje, in the middle [one], a skull—
bowl, in the last [one], a battle—axe ; in the first of the left, a bell, in 
the middle [one], a skull—bowl, in the last [one], a ploughshare: his 
body embraced by the Mother Vajra—Krotishaurima, her right [hand] 
clinging to his neck, her left offering to his mouth a red shell [filled 
with blood], will issue from the eastern quarter of thy brain and come 
to shine upon thce. Fear it not. Be not terrified. Be not awed. Know it 
to be the embodiment of thine own intellect. As it Is thine own tutelary 
deity, be not terrified. In reality [they are] the Bhagavfm Vajra—
Sattva, the Father and Mother. Believe in them. Recognizing them,



liberation will be obtained at once. By so proclaiming [them], knowing
them to be tutelary deities, merging [in them] in at—one—ment,
Buddhahood will be obtained.

[THE TENTH DAY]

 
Yet, if one do not recognize them, the obscurations of evil deeds

being too great, and flee from them through terror and awe, then, on
the Tenth Day, the blood—drinking [deities] of the [Precious]—Gem
Order will come to receive one. Thereupon the setting—face—to—
face is, calling the deceased by name, thus:

O nobly—born, listen. On the Tenth Day, the blood—drinking
[deity] of the [Prccious]—Gem Order named Ratna—Heruka, yellow
of colour; [having] three faces, six hands, four feet firmly postured ;
the right [face] white, the left, red, the central, darkish yellow;
enhaloed in flames; in the first of

the six hands holding a gem, in the middle [one], a trident—staff, in the
last [one], a baton; in the first of the left [hands], a bell, in the middle
[one], a skull—bowl, in the last [one], a trident—staff; his body
embraced by the Mother Ratna—Krotishaurima, her right [hand]
clinging to his neck, her left offering to his mouth a red shell [filled
with blood], will issue from the southern quarter of thy brain and come
to shine upon thee. Fear not. Be not terrified. Be not awed. Know
them to be the embodiment of thine own intellect. [They] being thine
own tutelary deity, be not terrified. In reality [they are] the Father—
Mother Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava. Believe in them. Recognition
[of them] and the obtaining of liberation will be simultaneous.

By so proclaiming [them], knowing them to be tutelary deities,
merging in them in at—one—ment, Buddhahood will be obtained.

[THE ELEVENTH DAY]



 
Yet, though set face—to—face thus, if, through power of evil

propensities, terror and awe being produced, not recognizing them to
be tutelary deities, one flee from them, then, on the Eleventh Day, the
blood—drinking Lotus Order will come to receive one. Thereupon the
setting—face—to—face is, calling the deceased by name, thus :

O nobly—born, on the Eleventh Day, the blood—drinking [deity] of
the Lotus Order, called the Bhagavān Padma—Heruka, of reddish—
black colour; [having] three faces, six hands, and four feet firmly
postured; the right [face] white, the left, blue, the central, darkish red;
in the first of the right of the six hands holding a lotus, in the middle
[one], a trident—staff, in the last, a club; in the first of the left [hands],
a bell, in the middle [one], a skull—bowl filled with blood1, in the last, a
small drum ; his body embraced by the Mother Padma—
Krotishaurima, her right hand clinging to his neck, her left offering to
his mouth a red shell [full of blood]; the Father

and Mother in union ; will issue from the western quarter of thy brain
and come to shine upon thee. Fear that not. Be not terrified. Be not
awed. Rejoice. Recognize [them] to be the product of thine own
intellect; as [they are] thine own tutelary deity, be not afraid. In reality
they are the Father—Mother Bhagavān Amitābha. Believe in them.
Concomitantly with recognition, liberation will come. Through such
acknowledging, recognizing them to be tutelary deities, in at—one—
ment thou wilt merge [into them], and obtain Buddhahood.

[THE TWELFTH DAY]

 
Despite such setting—face—to—face, being still led backwards by

evil propensities, terror and awe arising, it may be that one recognize
not and flee. Thereupon, on the Twelfth Day, the blood—drinking
deities of the Karmic Order, accompanied by the Kerima, Htamenma,
and Wang—chugma,1 will come to receive one. Not recognizing,
terror may be produced. Whereupon, the settiftg—face—to—face is,
calling the deceased by name, thus :



O nobly—born, on the Twelfth Day, the blood—drinking deityof the
Karmic Order, named Karma—Heruka, dark green ofcolour; [having]
three faces, six hands, [and] four feet firmlypostured; the right [face]
white, the left, red, the middle, darkgreen; majestic [of appearance]; in
the first of the right ofthe six hands, holding a sword, in the middle
[one], a trident—staff, in the last, a club; in the first of the left [hands],
a bell,in the middle [one] a skull—bowl, in the last, a ploughshare; his
body embraced by the Mother Karma—Kroti—

shaurima, her right [hand] clinging to his neck, the left offering to his
mouth a red shell; the Father and Mother in union, issuing from the
northern quarter of thy brain, will come to shine upon thee. Fear that
not. Be not terrified. Be not awed. Recognize them to be the
embodiment of thine own intellect. [They] being thine own tutelary
deity, be not afraid. In reality they are the Father—Mother Bhagavān
Amogha—Siddhi. Believe; and be humble; and be fond [of them].
Concomitantly with recognition, liberation will come. Through such
acknowledging, recognizing them to be tutelary deities, in at—one—
ment thou wilt merge [into them], and obtain Buddhahood. Through
the guru’s select teaching, one cometh to recognize them to be the
thought—forms issuing from one’s own intellectual faculties. For
instance, a person, upon recognizing a lion—skin [to be a lion—skin],
is freed [from fear]; for though it be only a stuffed lion—skin, if one
do not know it to be so actually, fear ariseth, but, upon being told by
some person that it is a lion—skin only, one is freed from fear.
Similarly here, too, when the bands of blood—drinking deities, huge of
proportions, with very thick—set limbs, dawn as big as the skies, awe
and terror are naturally produced in one. [But] as soon as the setting
—face—to—face is heard [one] recognizeth them to be one’s own
tutelary deities and one’s own thought—forms. Then, when upon the
Mother Clear—Light—which one had been accustomed to formerly
—a secondary Clear—Light, the Offspring Clear—Light, is produced,
and the Mother and Offspring Clear—Light, coming together like two
intimate acquaintances, blend inseparably, and [therefrom] a self—
emancipating radiance dawneth upon one, through sclf—enlighten—
ment and self—knowledge one is liberated.



[THE THIRTEENTH DAY]

 
If this setting—face—to—face be not obtained, good persons on

the Path,1 too, fall back from here and wander into the Sangsāra.
Then the Eight Wrathful Ones, the Kcrimas, and the Htamenmas,
having various [animal] heads, issue from within

one’s own brain and come to shine upon one’s self. Thereupon the
setting—face—to—face is, calling the deceased by name, thus:

O nobly—born, listen undistractedly. On the Thirteenth Day, from
the eastern quarter of thy brain, the Eight Kerimas will emanate and
come to shine upon thee. Fear that not.

From the east of thy brain, the White Kerima,1 holding a human
corpse, as a club, in the right [hand]; in the left, holding a skull—bowl
filled with blood, will come to shine upon thée. Fear not.

From the south, the Yellow Tseurima,2 holding a bow and arrow,
ready to shoot; from the west, the Red Pramoha,3 holding a
makarai~\>a.rmet ; from the north, the Black Petali,5holding a dorje
and a blood—filled skull—bowl; from the southeast, the Red
Pukkase,6 holding intestines in the right [hand] and [with] the left
putting them to her mouth; from the south—west, the Dark—Green
Ghasmari,7 the left [hand] holding a blood—filled skull—bowl, [with]
the right stirring it with a dorje) and [she then] drinking it with
majestic relish; from the north—west, the Yellowish—White
Tsandhali,8 tearing asunder a head from a corpse, the right [hand]
holding a heart, the left putting the corpse to the mouth and [she then]
eating [thereof] ; from the north—east, the Dark—Blue Smasha,9
tearing asunder a head from a corpse and eating [thereof]: these,

the Eight Kerimas of the Abodes [or Eight Directions], also come to
shine upon thee, surrounding the Five Blood—drinking Fathers. Yet be
not afraid.

O nobly—born, from the Circle outside of them, the Eight
Htamenmas of the [eight] regions [of the brain] will come to shine
upon thee: from the east, the Dark—Brown Lion—Headed One, the



hands crossed on the breast, and in the mouth holding a corpse, and
shaking the mane; from the south, the Red Tiger—Headed One, the
hands crossed downwards, grinning and showing the fangs and looking
on with protruding eyes; from the west, the Black Fox—Headed One,
the right [hand] holding a shaving—knife, the left holding an intestine,
and [she] eating and licking the blood [therefrom]; from the north, the
Dark—Blue Wolf—Headed One, the two hands tearing open a corpse
and looking on with protruding eyes; from the south—east, the
Yellowish—White Vulture—Headed One, bearing a gigantic [human
—shaped] corpse on the shoulder and holding a skeleton in the hand;
from the south—west, the Dark—Red Ccmetery—Bird—Headed
One, carrying a gigantic corpse on the shoulder; from the north—
west, the Black Crow—Headed One, the left [hand] holding a skull—
bowl, the right holding a sword, and [she] eating heart and lungs ; from
the north—east, the Dark—Blue Owl—Headed One, holding a dorje
in the right [hand], and holding a skull—bowl in the left, and eating.

These tight Htamenmas ot the [eight] regions, likewise surrounding
the Blood—Drinking Fathers, and issuing from within thy brain, come
to shine upon thee. Fear that not. Know them to be the thought—
forms of thine own intellectual faculties.

[THE FOURTEENTH DAY]

 
O nobly—born on the Fourteenth Day, the Four Female Door—

Keepers, also issuing from within thine own brain, will come to shine
upon thee. Again recognize. From the east [quarter] of thy brain will
come to shine the White Tiger—Headed Goad—Holding Goddess,
bearing a blood—filled skull—bowl in her left [hand]; from the south,
the Yellow Sow—Headed Noose—Holding Goddess; from the west,
the Red

Lion—Headed Iron—Chain—Holding Goddess; and from the north,
the Green Serpent—Headed Bell—Holding Goddess. Thus issue the
Four Female Door—Keepers also from within thine own brain and
come to shine upon thee; as tutelary deities, recognize them.



O nobly—born, on the outer Circle of these thirty wrathful deities,
Herukas, the twenty—eight various—headed mighty goddesses,
bearing various weapons, issuing from within thine own brain, will
come to shine upon thce. Fear that not. Recognize whatever shineth to
be the thought—forms of thine own intellectual faculties. At this vitally
important time, recollect the select teachings of the guru.

O nobly—born, [there will dawn] from the east the Dark—Brown
Yak—Headed Rakshasa—Goddess, holding a dorje and a skull; and
the Reddish—Yellow Serpent—Headed Brahma—Goddess, holding a
lotus in her hand ; and the Grccnish—Black Leopard—Headed Great
—Goddess, holding a trident in her hand; and the Blue Monkey—
Headed Goddess of In—quisitiveness, holding a wheel; and the Red
Snow—Bear—Headed Virgin—Goddess, bearing a short spear in the
hand; and the White Bear—Headed Indra—Goddcss, holding an
intestine—noose in the hand: [these], the Six Yoginls of the East,
issuing from within the [eastern quarter of thine own]1 brain, will
come to shine upon thee ; | a fear that not.

0nobly—born, from the south [will dawn] the Yellow Bat—Headed
Delight—Goddess, holding a shaving—knife in the hand ;and the Red
Makara—Headed Peaceful—[Goddcss], holding anurn in the hand;
and the Red Scorpion—Headed Amrjtā—Goddcss,holding a lotus in
the hand; and the White Kite—Headed Moon—Goddess, | holding a
dorje in the hand; and the Dark—GreenFox—Headed Baton—
Goddess, flourishing a club in the hand;and the Yellowish—Black
Tiger—Headed RākshasT, holdinga blood—filled skull—bowl in the
hand : [these] the Six

Yoginls of the South, issuing from within the [southern quarter of thine
own] brain, will come to shine upon thee; fear that not.

O nobly—born, from the west [will dawn] the Greenish—Black
Vulture—Headed Eater—Goddess, holding a baton in the hand; and
the Red Horse—Headed Delight—Goddess, holding a huge trunk of a
corpse; and the White Eagle—Headed Mighty—Goddess, holding a
club in the hand; and the Yellow Dog—Headed RåkfhasI, holding a
dorje in the hand and a shaving—knife and cutting [with this]; and the
Red Hoopoo—Headed Desire—Goddess, holding a bow and arrow in
the hand aimed; and the Green Stag—Headed Wealth—Guardian



Goddess, holding an urn in the hand: [these], the Six Yoginls of the
West, issuing from within the [western quarter of thine own] brain, will
come to shine upon thee; fear that not.

O nobly—born, from the north [will dawn] the Blue Wolf—Headed
Wind—Goddess, waving a pennant in the hand; andthe Red Ibex—
Headed Woman—Goddess, holding a pointedstake in the hand ; and
the Black Sow—Headed Sow—Goddess,holding a noose of fangs in
the hand; and the Red Crow—Headed Thunderbolt—Goddess,
holding an infant corpse in thehand; and the Greenish—Black
Elephant—Headed Big—NosedGoddess,1 holding in the hand a big
corpse and drinking bloodfrom a skull; and the Blue Serpent—Headed
Water—Goddess,holding in the hand a serpent noose: [these], the Six
Yoginlsof the North, issuing from within [the northern quarter of]thine
own brain, will come to shine upon thee; fear that not.

O nobly—born, the Four Yoginls of the Door, issuing from within
the brain, will come to shine upon thee: from the east, the Black
Cuckoo—Headed Mystic Goddess,9 holding an iron hook in the hand;
from the south, the Yellow Goat—Headed Mystic Goddess, holding a
noose in the hānd ; from the west, the Red Lion—Headed Mystic
Goddess, holding an iron chain

in the hand; and from the north, the Greenish—Black Serpent—
Headed Mystic Goddess: [these], the Four Door—Keeping Yoginls,
issuing from within the brain, will come to shine upon thee.

Since these Twenty—eight Mighty Goddesses emanate from the
bodily powers of Ratna—Sambhava, [He] of the Six Heruka Deities,
recognize them,1

O nobly—born, the Peaceful Deities emanate from the Void—ness
of the Dharma—Kāya ;2 recognize them. From the Radiance of the
Dhartna—Kāya* emanate the Wrathful Deities; recognize them.

At this time when the Fifty—eight Blood—Drinking Deities
4emanating from thine own brain come to shine upon thee, if thou
knowest them to be the radiances of thine own intellect, thou wilt
merge, in the state of at—one—ment, into the body of the Blood—
Drinking Ones there and then, and obtain Buddhahood.

O nobly—born, by not recognizing now, and by fleeing fromthe



deities out of fear, again sufferings will come to overpowerthee. If this
be not known, fear being begotten of the Blood—Drinking Deities,
[one is] awed and terrified and fainteth away:one’s own thought—
forms turn into illusory appearances, andone wandereth into the
Sangsāra; if one be not awed andterrified, one will not wander into
the Sangsāra.

Furthermore, the bodies of the largest of the Peaceful and Wrathful
Deities are equal [in vastness] to the limits of the heavens; the
intermediate, as big as Mt. Meru ;5 the smallest, equal to eighteen
bodies such as thine own body, set one upon another. Be not terrified
at that; be not awed. If all existing phenomena shining forth as divine
shapes and radiances be recognized to be the emanations of one’s
own intellect, Buddhahood will be obtained at that very instant of
recognition. The saying, ‘Buddhahood will be obtained in a moment [of
time] ‘is that which applieth now. Bearing this in mind, one will obtain
Buddhahood by merging, in at—one—ment, into the Radiances and
the Kāyas.

O nobly—born, whatever fearful and terrifying visions thou mayst
see, recognize them to be thine own thought—forms.

O nobly—born, if thou recognize not, and be frightened,then all the
Peaceful Deities will shine forth in the shapeof Mahā—Kāla;1 and all
the Wrathful Deities will shine[forth] in the form of Dharma—Rāja,
the Lord of Death; *and thine own thought—forms becoming Illusions
[or Māras\ thou wilt wander into the Sangsāra.

O nobly—born, if one recognize not one’s own thought—forms,
however learned one may be in the Scriptures—both Sütras and
Tantras —although practising religion for a ka/pa, one obtaineth not
Buddhahood. If one recognize one’s ownthought—forms, by one
important art and by one word, Buddhahood is obtained.

If one’s thought—forms be not recognized as soon as one dieth, the
shapes of Dharma—Raja, the Lord of Death, will shine forth on the
Chönyid Bardo. The largest of the bodies of Dharma—Rāja, the
Lord of Death, equalling the heavens [in vastness] ; the intermediate,
Mt. Meru ; the smallest, eighteen times one’s own body, will come
filling the world—systems. They will come having their upper teeth
biting the nether lip; their eyes glassy; their hairs tied up on the top of
the head ; big—bellied, narrow—waisted ; holding a [karmic] record



—

board1 in the hand; giving utterance from their mouth to sounds of
‘Strike! Slay I’, licking [human] brain, drinking blood, tearing heads
from corpses, tearing out [the] hearts: thus will [they] come, filling the
worlds.

O nobly—born, when such thought—forms emanate, be thounot
afraid, nor terrified; the body which now thou possessestbeing a
mental—body of [kartmc] propensities, though slainand chopped [to
bits], cannot die. Because thy body is,in reality, one of voidness, thou
ncedcst not fear. The[bodies of the] Lord of Death, too, are
emanations fromthe radiances of thine own intellect; they are not
constitutedof matter; voidness cannot injure voidness. Beyond
theemanations of thine own intellectual faculties, externally,the
Peaceful and the Wrathful Ones, the Blood—DrinkingOnes, the
Various—Headed Ones, the rainbow lights, theterrifying forms of the
Lord of Death, exist not in reality:of this, there is no doubt. Thus,
knowing this, all the fearand terror is self—dissipated; and, merging in
the state ofat—one—ment, Buddhahood is obtained.

If thou recognizest in that manner, exerting thy faith and affection
towards the tutelary deities and believing that they have come to
receive thee amidst the ambuscades of the Bardo, think,’ [I] take
refuge [in them]’; and remember the Precious Trinity, exerting
towards them [the Trinity] fondness and faith. Whosoever thine own
tutelary deity may be, recollect now; [and] calling him by name, pray
thus :

‘[Alas!], wandering am I in the Bardo ; run to my rescue; Uphold me
by thy grace, O Precious Tutelary!’

Calling upon the name of thine own guru, pray thus:

‘[Alas!] wandering am I in the Bardo ; rescue me 1 [O] let not thy
grace forsake me !’

Have faith in the Blood—Drinking Deities, too, and offer up this
prayer:

‘Alas t when [I am] wandering in the Sangsāra, through force of



overpowering illusions,

On the light—path of the abandonment of fright, fear, and awe, May
the bands of the Bhagavāns, the Peaceful and Wrathful Ones, lead
[me];

May the bands of the Wrathful Goddesses Rich in Space be [my]
rear—guard,

And save me from the fearful ambuscades of the Barda, And place
me in the state of the Perfectly—Enlightened Buddhas.

When wandering alone, separated from dear friends, When the void
forms of one’s own thoughts are shining here, May the Buddhas,
exerting the force of their grace, Cause not to come the fear, awe, and
terror in the Bardo. When the five bright Wisdom—Lights are shining
here, May recognition come without dread and without awe; When
the divine bodies of the Peaceful and the Wrathful are shining here,

May the assurance of fearlessness be obtained and the Bardo be
recognized.

When, by the power of evil karma, misery is being tasted, May the
tutelary deities dissipate the misery; When the natural sound of Reality
is reverberating [like] a thousand thunders,

May they be transmuted into the sounds of the Six Syllables.1

When unprotected, karma having to be followed here, I beseech the
Gracious Compassionate [One]1 to protect me ; When suffering
miseries of karmic propensities here, May the blissfulness of the
Clear Light dawn; May the Five Elements2 not rise up as enemies;
But may I behold the realms of the Five Orders of the Enlightened
Ones/

Thus, in earnest faith and humility, offer up the prayer; whereby all
fears will vanish and Buddhahood in the Sambhoga—Kāya will
undoubtedly be won: important is this. Being un—distracted, repeat it
in that manner, three or [even] seven times.

However heavy the evil karma may be and however weak the
remaining harina may be, it is not possible that liberation will not be



obtained [if one but recognize]. If, nevertheless, despite everything
done in these [stages of the Bardo], recognition is still not brought
about, then—there being danger of one’s wandering further, into the
third Bardo, called the Sidpa Bardo —the setting—face—to—face
for that will be shown in detail hereinafter.



[THE CONCLUSION, SHOWING
THE FUNDAMENTAL

IMPORTANCE OF THE BARDO
TEACHINGS]

 
Whatever the religious practices of any one may have been, —

whether extensive or limited,—during the moments of death various
misleading illusions occur; and hence this Th’ódol is indispensable. To
those who have meditated much, the real Truth dawneth as soon as
the body and consciousness—principle part. The acquiring of
experience while living is important: they who have [then] recognized
[the true nature of] their own being,1 and thus have had some
experience, obtain great power during the Bardo of the Moments of
Death, when the Clear Light dawneth.

Again, the meditation on the deities of the Mystic Path of the
Mantra, [both in the] visualizing and the perfecting stages, while
living, will be of great influence when the peaceful and wrathful
visions dawn on the Chönyid Bardo. Thus the training in this Bardo
being of particular importance even while living,2 hold to it, read it,
commit it to memory, bear it in mind properly, read it regularly thrice;
let the words and the meanings be very clear; it should be so that the
words and the meanings will not be forgotten even though a hundred
executioners were pursuing [thee].

It is called the Great Liberation by Hearing, because even those
who have committed the five boundless sins1 are sure to be liberated
if they hear it by the path of the ear. Therefore read it in the midst of
vast congregations. Disseminate it. Through having heard it once,
even though one do not comprehend it, it will be remembered in the
Intermediate State without a word being omitted, for the intellect
becometh ninefold more lucid [there]. Hence it should be proclaimed
in the ears of all living persons; it should be read over the pillows of all



persons who are ill; it should be read at the side of all corpses: it
should be spread broadcast.

Those who meet with this [doctrine] are indeed fortunate. Save for
them who have accumulated much merit and absolved many
obscurations, difficult is it to meet with it. Even when met with,
difficult is it to comprehend it. Liberation will be won through simply
not disbelieving it upon hearing it. Therefore treat this [doctrine] very
dearly: it is the essence of all doctrines.2

The Setting—Face—to—Face while experiencing Reality in the
Intermediate State, called ‘The Teaching Which Liberateth By Merely
Being Heard And That Which Liberateth By Merely Being
Attached’,3 is finished4.



[BOOK II]
[THE SIDPA BARDO]

 
THIS IS KNOWN AS THE GOOD HEAD—PART OF THAT

CALLED ‘THE PROFOUND ESSENCE OF THE LIBERATION
BY HEARING1,—THE REMINDER, THE CLEAR SETTING—
FACE—TO—FACE IN THE INTERMEDIATE STATE WHEN
SEEKING REBIRTH1

‘The essence of all things is one and the same, perfectly calm and
tranquil, and shows no sign of “becoming"; ignorance, however, is in its
blindness and delusion oblivious of Enlightenment, and, on that
account, cannot recognize truthfully all those conditions, differences,
and activities which characterize the phenomena of the Universe.’ -
Ashvaghosha. Th$ Awakening of Faith (Suzuki’s Translation).

[THE OBEISANCES]

 

To the assembled Deities, to the Tutelaries, to the Gurus, Humbly is
obeisance paid:

May Liberation in the Intermediate State be vouchsafed by Them.1

[INTRODUCTORY VERSES]

 

Above, in the Great Bardo—Thdol, The Bardo called Chönyid was
taught; And now, of the Bardo called Sidpa, The vivid reminder is
brought.



[PART I]
[THE AFTER—DEATH WORLD]

 
[Introductory Instructions to the Officiant]: Although, heretofore,

while in the Chönyid Bardo, many vivid re—mindings have been
given,—setting aside those who have had great familiarity with the
real Truth and those who have good karma, —for them of evil karma
who have had no familiarity, and for them of evil karma who because
of the influence thereof become stricken with fear and terror,
recognition is difficult. These go down to the Fourteenth Day; and, to
reimpress them vividly, that which follows is to be read.



[THE BARDO BODY: ITS BIRTH
AND ITS SUPERNORMAL

FACULTIES]
 

Worship having been offered to the Trinity, and the prayer invoking
the aid of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas having been recited, then,
calling the deceased by name, three or seven times, speak thus:

O nobly—born, listen thou well, and bear at heart that birth

in the Hell—world, in the Zføw—world, and in this Bardo—body is of
the kind called supernormal birth.1

Indeed, when thou wert experiencing the radiances of the Peaceful
and the Wrathful, in the Chónyid Bardo, being unable to recognize,
thou didst faint away, through fear, about three 2and one—half days
[after thy decease] ; and, then, when thou wert recovered from the
swoon, thy Knower must have risen up in its primordial condition and
a radiant body, resembling the former body, must have sprung forth3—
as the Tantra says,

’ Having a body [seemingly] fleshly [resembling] the former and
that to be produced,

Endowed with all sense—faculties and power of unimpeded motion,
Possessing karmic miraculous powers,
Visible to pure celestial eyes [of Bardo beings] of like nature’

Such, then, is the teaching.
That [radiant body]—thus referred to as [resembling] ‘the former

and that to be produced’ (meaning that one will have a body just like
the body of flesh and blood, the former human, propensity body)—will
also be endowed with certain signs and beauties of perfection such as
beings of high destiny possess.

This body, [born] of desire, is a thought—form hallucination in the
Intermediate State, and it is called desire—body.



At that time—if thou art to be born as a deva —visions of the
Deva—v/orld will appear to thee; similarly—wherever thou art to be
born—if as an asura, or a human being, or a brute,1 or a preta, or a
being in Hell, a vision of the place will appear to thee.

Accordingly, the word ‘former’ [in the quotation] implieth that prior
to the three and one—half days thou wilt have been thinking thou
hadst the same sort of a body as the former body of flesh and blood,
possessed by thee in thy former existence because of habitual
propensities;2 and the word 1 produced’ is so used because,
afterwards, the vision of thy future place of birth will appear to thee.
Hence, the expression as a whole, ‘former and that to be produced’,
referreth to these [i.e. the fleshly body just discarded and the fleshly
body to be assumed at rebirth].

At that time, follow not the visions which appear to thee. Be not
attracted; be not weak: if, through weakness, thou be fond of them,
thou wilt have to wander amidst the Six Lokas and suffer pain.

Up to the other day thou wert unable to recognize the Chönyid B
ardo > and hast had to wander down this far. Now, if thou art to hold
fast to the real Truth, thou must allow thy mind to rest undistractedly in
the nothing—to—do, nothing—to—hold condition of the unobscured,
primordial, bright, void state of thine intellect, to which thou hast been
introduced by thy guru? [Thereby] thou wilt obtain Liberation without
having to enter the door of the womb. But if thou art unable to know
thyself, then, whosoever may be thy tutelary deity and thy guru,
meditate on them, in a state of intense fondness

and humble trust, as overshadowing the crown of thy head.1This is of
great importance. Be not distracted.

[Instructions to the Officiant] : Thus speak, and, if recognition result
from that, Liberation will be obtained, without need of the wandering
in the Six Lokas. If, however, through influence of bad karma>
recognition is made difficult, thereupon say as follows:

O nobly—born, again listen.’Endowed with all sense—faculties and
power of unimpeded motion1 implieth [that although] thou mayst have
been, when living, blind of the eye, or deaf, or lame, yet on this After
—Death Plane thine eyes will see forms, and thine ears will hear



sounds, and all other sense—organs of thine will be unimpaired and
very keen and complete. Wherefore the Bardo—body hath been
spoken of as ‘endowed with all sense—faculties \ That [condition of
existence, in which thou thyself now art] is an indication that thou art
deceased and wandering in the Bardo. Act so as to know this.
Remember the teachings; remember the teachings.

O nobly—born,’ unimpeded motion’ implieth that thy present body
being a desire—body—thine intellect having been separated from its
seat2—is not a body of gross matter, so that now thou hast the power
to go right through any rock—masses, hills, boulders, earth, houses,
and Mt. Meru itself without being impeded.3 Excepting Budh—Gayā
and the mother’s womb,4 even

the King of Mountains, Mt. Meru itself, can be passed through by
thee, straight forwards and backwards unimpededly. That, too, is an
indication that thou art wandering in the Sidpa Bardo. Remember thy
guru’s teachings, and pray to the Compassionate Lord.

O nobly—born, thou art actually endowed with the power of
miraculous action,1 which is not, however, the fruit of any samad/ti,
but a power come to thee naturally; and, therefore, it is of the nature
of karmic power.2 Thou art able in a moment to traverse the four
continents round about Mt. Meru.3 Or thou canst instantaneously
arrive in whatever place thou wishest; thou hast the power of reaching
there within the time which a man taketh to bend, or to stretch forth
his hand. These various powers of illusion and of shape—shifting
desire not, desire not.4

None is there [of such powers] which thou mayst desire which thou
canst not exhibit. The ability to exercise them unimpededly existeth in
thee now. Know this, and pray to the guru.

O nobly—born, * Visible to pure celestial eyes of like nature’

implieth that those [beings] of like nature, being those of similar
constitution [or level of knowledge] in the Intermediate State, will
individually see each other.1 For example, those beings who are
destined to be born amongst devas will see each other [and so on].
Dote not on them [seen by thee], but meditate upon the



Compassionate One,
‘Visible to pure celestial eyes1 [also] implieth that the devas, being

born [pure] in virtue of merit, are visible to the pure celestial eyes of
those who practise dhyāna. These will not see them at all times:
when mentally concentrated [upon them] they see [them], when not,
they see [them] not. Sometimes, even when practising dhyāna they
are liable to become distracted [and not see them].2



[CHARACTERISTICS OF
EXISTENCE IN THE

INTERMEDIATE STATE]
 

O nobly—born, the possessor of that sort of body will see places
[familiarly known on the earth—plane] and relatives [there] as one
seeth another in dreams.

Thou seest thy relatives and connexions and speakest to them, but
receivest no reply. Then, seeing them and thy family weeping, thou
thinkest, ‘I am dead! What shall I do?’ and feelest great misery, just
like a fish cast out

[of water] on red—hot embers. Such misery thou wilt be experiencing
at present. But feeling miserable will avail thee nothing now. If thou
hast a divine guru} pray to him. Pray to the Tutelary Deity, the
Compassionate One. Even though thou feelest attachment for thy
relatives and connexions, it will do thee no good. So be not attached.
Pray to the Compassionate Lord; thou shalt have nought of sorrow, or
of terror, or of awe.

O nobly—born, when thou art driven [hither and thither]by the ever
—moving wind of karma, thine intellect, havingno object upon which
to rest, will be like a feather tossedabout by the wind, riding on the
horse of breath.2 Ceaselessly and involuntarily wilt thou be wandering
about. Toall those who are weeping [thou wilt say], * Here I am ;
weepnot.’ But they not hearing thee, thou wilt think, ‘I amdead !’ And
again, at that time, thou wilt be feeling verymiserable. Be not
miserable in that way.

There will be a grey twilight—like light, both by night and by day,
and at all times.3 In that kind of Intermediate State thou wilt be either
for one, two, three, four, ñve, six, or seven weeks, until the forty—
ninth day.4 It hath been said that ordinarily the miseries of the Sidpa
Bardo are experienced for about twenty—two days; but, because of



the determining influence of karma, a fixed period is not assured.
O nobly—born, at about that time, the fierce wind of karma, terrific

and hard to endure, will drive thee [onwards], from behind, in dreadful
gusts. Fear it not. That is thine own

illusion. Thick awesome darkness will appear in front of thcc
continually, from the midst of which there will come such terror—
producing utterances as’Strike! Slay! * and similar threats.1 Fear
these not.

In other cases, of persons of much evil karma, karmicalty—
produced flesh—eating rāk$hasas [or demons] bearing various
weapons will utter, * Strike! Slay!’ and so on, making a frightful
tumult. They will come upon one as if competing amongst themselves
as to which [of them] should get hold of one. Apparitional illusions,
too, of being pursued by various terrible beasts of prey will dawn.
Snow, rain, darkness, fierce blasts [of wind], and hallucinations of
being pursued by many people likewise will come; [and] sounds as of
mountains crumbling down, and of angry overflowing seas, and of the
roaring of fire, and of fierce winds springing up.8

When these sounds come one, being terrified by them, will flee
before them in every direction, not caring whither one flecth. But the
way will be obstructed by three awful precipices—white, and black,
and red. They will be terror—inspiring and deep, and one will feel as if
one were about to fall down them. O nobly—born, they are not really
precipices ; they are Anger, Lust, and Stupidity.8

Know at that time that it is the Sidpa Bardo [in which thou art].
Invoking, by name, the Compassionate One, pray earnestly, thus: ‘O
Compassionate Lord, and my Guru, and the Precious Trinity, suffer it
not that I (so—and—o by name) fall into the unhappy worlds.’ Act so
as to forget this not.

Others who have accumulated merit, and devoted themselves
sincerely to religion, will experience various delightful pleasures and
happiness and ease in full measure. But that class of neutral beings
who have neither earned merit nor created bad karma will experience
neither pleasure nor pain, but a sort of colourless stupidity of
indifference. O nobly—born, whatever cometh in that manner—
whatever delightful pleasures thou mayst experience—be not



attracted by them ; dote not [on them]: think, ‘May the Guru and the
Trinity be worshipped [with these merit—given delights]’. Abandon all
dotings and hankerings.

Even though thou dost not experience pleasure, or pain, but only
indifference, keep thine intellect in the undistracted state of the
[meditation upon the] Great Symbol, without thinking that thou art
meditating.1 This is of vast importance.

O nobly—born, at that time, at bridge—heads, in temples, by stüpas
of eight kinds,2 thou wilt rest a little while, but thou wilt not be able to
remain there very long, for thine

intellect hath been separated from thine [earth—plane] body.1Because
of this inability to loiter, thou oft—times wilt feel perturbed and vexed
and panic—stricken. At times, thy Knower will be dim ; at times,
fleeting and incoherent. Thereupon this thought will occur to thee,
‘Alas! I am dead! What shall I do ? * and because of such thought the
Knower will become saddened and the heart chilled, and thou wilt
experience infinite misery of sorrow.2 Since thou canst not rest in any
one place, and feel impelled to go on, think not of various things, but
allow the intellect to abide in its own [unmodified] state.

As to food, only that which hath been dedicated to thee can be
partaken of by thee, and no other food.3 As to friends at this time,
there will be no certainty.4

These are the indications of the wandering about on the Sidpa
Bardo of the mental—body. At the time, happiness and misery will
depend upon karma.

Thou wilt see thine own home, the attendants, relatives, and the
corpse, and think, c Now I am dead! What shall I do ?’ and being
oppressed with intense sorrow, the thought

‘And so thinking, thou wilt be wandering hither and thither seeking a
body.

Even though thou couldst enter thy dead body nine times over—
owing to the long interval which thou hast passed in the Chónyid
Bardo —it will have been frozen if in winter, been decomposed if in
summer, or, otherwise, thy relatives will have cremated it, or interred



it, or thrown it into the water, or given it to the birds and beasts of
prey.1 Wherefore finding no place for thyself to enter into, thou wilt be
dissatisfied and have the sensation of being squeezed into cracks and
crevices amidst rocks and boulders.2 The experiencing of this sort of
misery occurs in the Intermediate State when seeking rebirth. Even
though thou seekest a body, thou wilt gain nothing but trouble. Put
aside the desire for a body; and permit thy mind to abide in the state of
resignation, and act so as to abide therein.

By thus being set face to face, one obtaineth liberation from the
Bardo.



[THE JUDGEMENT]
 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Yet, again, it may be possible that
because of the influence of bad karma one will not recognize even
thus. Therefore, call the deceased by name, and speak as follows:

O nobly—born, (so—and—so), listen. That thou art sufferingso
cometh from thine own karma ; it is not due to any oneelse’s: it is by
thine own karma. Accordingly, pray earnestlyto the Precious Trinity;
that will protect thee. If thouneither prayest nor knowest how to
meditate upon the GreatSymbol nor upon any tutelary deity, the Good
Genius,3 who

was born simultaneously with thee, will come now and count out thy
good deeds [with] white pebbles, and the Evil Genius,1who was born
simultaneously with thee, will come and count out thy evil deeds [with]
black pebbles. Thereupon, thou wilt be greatly frightened, awed, and
terrified, and wilt tremble; and thou wilt attempt to tell lies, saying, * I
have not committed any evil deed’.

Then the Lord of Death will say, * I will consult the Mirror of
Karma’.

So saying, he will look in the Mirror, wherein every good and evil
act is vividly reflected. Lying will be of no avail.

Then [one of the Executive Furies of] the Lord of Death will place
round thy neck a rope and drag thee along; he will cut off thy head,
extract thy heart, pull out thy intestines, lick up thy brain, drink thy
blood, eat thy flesh, and gnaw thy bones;2 but thou wilt be incapable of
dying. Although thy body be hacked to pieces, it will revive again. The
repeated hacking will cause intense pain and torture.

Even at the time that the pebbles are being counted out, be not
frightened, nor terrified ; tell no lies; and fear not the Lord of Death.

Thy body being a mental body is incapable of dying even though
beheaded and quartered. In reality, thy body is of the nature of
voidness;8 thou needst not be afraid. The



 

THE JUDGEMENT Described on pages xxx—xxxiii, 35—8,
165—y, 240

 
THE MANTRA OF CHEN RAZEE



 

"OM MA—NI PAD—ME HUM”

Described on page xxxiv

Lords of Death1 are thine own hallucinations. Thy desire—body is a
body of propensities, and void. Voidness cannot injure voidness; the
qualityless cannot injure the qualityless.

Apart from one’s own hallucinations, in reality there are no such
things existing outside oneself as Lord of Death, or god, or demon, or
the Bull—headed Spirit of Death.2 Act so as to recognize this.

At this time, act so as to recognize that thou art in the Bardo.
Meditate upon the Samadla of the Great Symbol. If thou dost not
know how to meditate, then merely analyse with care the real nature
of that which is frightening thee. In reality it is not formed into
anything, but is a Voidness which is the Dharma—Kāya?

That Voidness is not of the nature of the voidness of nothingness,
but a Voidness at the true nature of which thou feelest awed, and
before which thine intellect shineth clearly and more lucidly: that is the
[state of] mind of the Sambhoga—Kāya.

In that state wherein thou art existing, there is being experienced by
thce, in an unbearable intensity, Voidness and Brightness inseparable,
—the Voidness bright by nature and the Brightness by nature void, and
the Brightness inseparable from the Voidness,—a state of the
primordial [or unmodified] intellect, which is the Ådi—Kāya.A And the

power of this, shining unobstructedly, will radiate everywhere; it is the
Nirmāna—Kāya.

O nobly—born, listen unto me undistractedly. By merelyrecognizing
the Four Kāyas thou art certain to obtain perfectEmancipation in any
of Them. Be not distracted. The lineof demarcation between Buddhas
and sentient beings licthherein.1 This moment is one of great
importance; if thoushouldst be distracted now, it will require
innumerable aeonsof time for thee to come out2 of the Quagmire of
Misery.



A saying, the truth of which is applicable, is:

‘In a moment of time, a marked differentiation is created; In a
moment of time, Perfect Enlightenment is obtained.’

Till the moment which hath just passed, all this Bardo hath been
dawning upon thee and yet thou hast not recognized, because of being
distracted. On this account, thou hast experienced all the fear and
terror. Shouldst thou become distracted now, the chords of divine
compassion of the Compassionate Eyes will break,3 and thou wilt go
into the place from which there is no [immediate] liberation.
Therefore, be careful. Even though thou hast not recognized ere this
—despite thus being set face to face—thou wilt recognize and obtain
liberation here.

[Instructions to the Officiant]: If it be an illiterate boor who knoweth
not how to meditate, then say this:

O nobly—born, if thou knowest not how thus to meditate, act so as
to remember the Compassionate One, and the Sañgha, the Dharma,
and the Buddha, and pray. Think of all these fears and terrifying
apparitions as being thine own tutelary deity, or as the Compassionate
One.4 Bring to thy recollection the mystic name that hath been given
thee at the time

‘Even though thou fallest down precipices, thou wilt not be hurt Avoid
awe and terror.



[THE ALL—DETERMINING
INFLUENCE OF THOUGHT]

 
[Instructions to the Officiant]: Say that; for by such setting—face—

to—face, despite the previous non—liberation, liberation ought surely
to be obtained2 here. Possibly, [however,] liberation may not be
obtained even after that setting—face—to—face ; and earnest and
continued application being essential, again calling the deceased by
name, speak as follows:

O nobly—born, thy immediate experiences will be of momentary
joys followed by momentary sorrows, of great intensity, like the [taut
and relaxed] mechanical actions of catapults.3Be not in the least
attached [to the joys] nor displeased [by the sorrows] of that.

If thou art to be born on a higher plane, the vision of that higher
plane will be dawning upon thee.

Thy living relatives may—by way of dedication for the benefit of
thee deceased—be sacrificing many animals,4 and performing
religious ceremonies, and giving alms. Thou,

because of thy vision not being purified, mayst be inclined to grow
very angry at their actions and bring about, at this moment, thy birth in
Hell: whatever those left behind thee may be doing, act thou so that no
angry thought can arise in thee, and meditate upon love for them.

Furthermore, even if thou feelest attached to the worldly goods thou
hast left behind, or, because of seeing such worldly goods of thine in
the possession of other people and being enjoyed by them, thou
shouldst feel attached to them through weakness, or feel angry with
thy successors, that feeling will affect the psychological moment in
such a way that, even though thou wert destined to be born on higher
and happier planes, thou wilt be obliged to be born in Hell, or in the
world of pretas [or unhappy ghosts]. On the other hand, even if thou
art attached to worldly goods left behind, thou wilt not be able to
possess them, and they will be of no use to thee. Therefore, abandon



weakness and attachment for them ; cast them away wholly;
renounce them from thy heart. No matter who may be enjoying thy
worldly goods, have no feeling of miserliness, but be prepared to
renounce them willingly. Think that thou art offering them to the
Precious Trinity and to thy guru and abide in the feeling of
unattachment, devoid of weakness [of desire].

Again, when any recitation of the Kamkani Mantra1 is being made
on thy behalf as a funeral rite, or wfaen any rite for the absolving of
bad karma liable to bring about thy birth in lower regions is being
performed for thee, the sight of their being conducted in an incorrect
way, mixed up with sleep and distraction and non—observance of the
vows and lack of purity [on the part of any officiant], and such things
indicating levity—all of which thou wilt be able to see because thou art
endowed with limited karmic power of prescience *—thou mayst feel
lack of faith and entire disbelief [in thy religion]. Thou wilt be able to
apprehend any fear and fright, any black actions, irreligious conduct,
and incorrectly recited rituals.3 In thy mind thou mayst think, ‘Alas!
they are, indeed, playing me false \ Thinking thus, thou wilt be
extremely depressed, and, through great resentment, thou wilt acquire
disbelief and loss of faith, instead of affection and humble trustfulness.
This affecting the psychological moment, thou wilt be certain to be
born in one of the miserable states.

Such [thought] will not only be of no use to thee, but will do thee
great harm. However incorrect the ritual and improper the conduct of
the priests performing thy funeral rites, [think], ‘What! mine own
thoughts must be impure! How can it be possible that the words of the
Buddha should be incorrect ? It is like the reflection of the blemishes
on mine own face which I see in a mirror; mine own thoughts must
[indeed] be impure. As for these [i. e. the priests], the Sañgha is their
body, the Dharma their utterance, and in their mind they are the
Buddha in reality: I will take refuge in them’.

Thus thinking, put thy trust in them and exercise sincere love
towards them. Then whatever is done for thee [by those] left behind
will truly tend to thy benefit. Therefore the exercise of that love is of
much importance ; do not forget this.

Again, even if thou wert to be born in one of the miserable states
and the light of that miserable state shone upon thee, yet by thy



successors and relatives performing white1 religious rites unmixed
with evil actions, and the abbots and learned priests devoting
themselves, body, speech, and mind, to the performance of the correct
meritorious rituals, the delight from thy feeling greatly cheered at
seeing them will, by its own virtue, so affect the psychological moment
that, even though thou deservest a birth in the unhappy states, there
will be brought about thy birth on a higher and happier plane.
[Therefore] thou shouldst not create impious thoughts, but exercise
pure affection and humble faith towards all impartially. This is highly
important. Hence be extremely careful.

O nobly—born, to sum up: thy present intellect in the Intermediate
State having no firm object whereon to depend, being of little weight
and continuously in motion, whatever thought occurs to thee now—be
it pious or impious—will wield great power; therefore think not in thy
mind of impious things, but recall any devotional exercises; or, if thou
wert unaccustomed to any such exercises, [show forth] pure affection
and humble faith; pray to the Compassionate One, or to thy tutelary
deities; with full resolve, utter this prayer :

‘Alas! while wandering alone, separated from loving friends,2 When
the vacuous, reflected body of mine own mental ideas dawneth upon
me,

May the Buddhas, vouchsafing their power of compassion, Grant that
there shall be no fear, awe, or terror in the Bardo. When experiencing
miseries, through the power of evil karma

May the tutelary deities dispel the miseries.

When the thousand thunders of the Sound of Reality reverberate,

May they all be sounds of the Six Syllables.1When Karma follows,
without there being any protector, May the Compassionate One
protect me, I pi ay. When experiencing the sorrows of karmic
propensities here, May the radiance of the happy clear light of
Samādhi shine upon me.’

Earnest prayer in this form will be sure to guide thee along; thou
mayst rest assured that thou wilt not be deceived. Of great importance



is this: through that being recited, again recollection cometh; and
recognition and liberation will be achieved.



[THE DAWNING OF THE LIGHTS
OF THE SIX LOKAS]

 
[Instructions to the Officiant] : Yet—though this [instruction] be so

oft repeated—if recognition be difficult, because of the influence of
evil karma, much benefit will come from repeating these settings—
face—to—face many times over. Once more, [then,] call the
deceased by name, and speak as follows :

O nobly—born, if thou hast been unable to apprehend the above,
henceforth the body of the past life will become more and more dim
and the body of the future life will become more and more clear.
Saddened at this [thou wilt think], c O what misery I am undergoing!
Now, whatever body I am to get, I shall go and seek [it] \ So thinking,
thou wilt be going hither and thither, ceaselessly and distractedly. Then
there will shine upon thee the lights of the Six Sangsāric Lokas. The
light of that place wherein thou art to be born, through power of
karma, will shine most prominently.

O nobly—born, listen. If thou desirest to know what those six lights
are: there will shine upon thee a dull white light from the Deva—
v/orld, a dull green light from the Asura— world, a dull yellow light
from the Human—world, a dull blue

light from the Brute—world, a dull red light from the Preta— world,
and a smoke—coloured light from the Hell—world.1 At that time, by
the power of karma thine own body will partake of the colour of the
light of the place wherein thou art to be born.

O nobly—born, the special art of these teachings is especially
important at this moment: whichever light shineth upon thee now,
meditate upon it as being the Compassionate One; from whatever
place the light cometh, consider that [place] to be [or to exist in] the
Compassionate One. This is an exceedingly profound art; it will
prevent birth. Or whosoever thy tutelary deity may be, meditate upon
the form for much time,— as being apparent yet non—existent in



reality, like a form produced by a magician. That is called the pure
illusory form. Then let the [visualization of the] tutelary deity melt
away from the extremities, till nothing at all remaineth visible of it; and
put thyself in the state of the Clearness and the Voidness2—which
thou canst not conceive as something— and abide in that state for a
little while. Again meditate upon the tutelary deity; again meditate
upon the Clear Light: do this alternately. Afterwards, allow thine own
intellect also to melt away gradually,3 [beginning] from the extremities.

Wherever the ether4 pervadeth, consciousness pervadeth;
wherever consciousness pervadeth, the Dharma—Kāya pervadeth.
Abide tranquilly in the uncreated state of the Dharma—Kāya. In that
state, birth will be obstructed and Perfect Enlightenment gained.



[PART II]
[THE PROCESS OF REBIRTH] [THE
CLOSING OF THE DOOR OF THE

WOMB]
 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Again, if through great weakness in
devotions and lack of familiarity one be not able to understand, illusion
may overcome one, and one will wander to the doors of wombs. The
instruction for the closing of the womb—doors becometh very
important: call the deceased by name and say this :

O nobly—born, if thou hast not understood the above, at this
moment, through the influence of karma, thou wilt have the impression
that thou art either ascending, or moving along on a level, or going
downwards. Thereupon, meditate upon the Compassionate One.
Remember. Then, as said above, gusts of wind, and icy blasts, hail—
storms, and darkness, and impression of being pursued by many
people will come upon thee. On fleeing from these [hallucinations],
those who are unendowed with meritorious karma will have the
impression of fleeing into places of misery; those who are endowed
with meritorious karma will have the impression of arriving in places
of happiness. Thereupon, O nobly—born, in whatever continent or
place thou art to be born, the signs of that birthplace will shine upon
thee then.

For this moment there are several vital profound teachings. Listen
undistractedly. Even though thou hast not apprehended by the above
settings—face—to—face, here [thou wilt, because] even those who
are very weak in devotions will recognize the signs. Therefore listen.

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Now it is very important to employ
the methods of closing the womb—door. Wherefore it is necessary to
exercise the utmost care. There are two [chief] ways of closing:
preventing the being who would enter from entering, and closing the
womb—door which might be entered.



[METHOD OF PREVENTING ENTRY INTO A WOMB]
 

The instructions for preventing the being from entering are thus:
O nobly—born, (so—and—so by name,) whosoever may have

been thy tutelary deity, tranquilly meditate upon him,—as upon the
reflection of the moon in water, apparent yet non—existent [as a
moon], like a magically—produced illusion. If thou hast no special
tutelary, meditate either upon the Compassionate Lord or upon me;
and, with this in mind, meditate tranquilly.

Then, causing the [visualized form of the] tutelary deity to melt
away from the extremities, meditate, without any thought—forming,
upon the vacuous Clear Light. This is a very profound art; in virtue of
it, a womb is not entered.

[THE FIRST METHOD OF CLOSING THE WOMB—DOOR]
 

In that manner meditate; but even though this be found inadequate
to prevent thee from entering into a womb, and if thou findest thyself
ready to enter into one, then there is the profound teaching for closing
the womb—door. Listen thou unto it:

‘When, at this time, alas! the Sidpa Bardo is dawning upon oneself,

Holding in mind one single resolution, Persist in joining up the chain of
good karma ;1Close up the womb—door, and remember the
opposition.2This is a time when earnestness and pure love are
necessary;

Abandon jealousy, and meditate upon the Guru Father—Mother/

Repeat this, from thine own mouth, distinctly; and re—

member its meaning vividly, and meditate upon it. The putting of this
into practice is essential.

The significance of the above teaching,’ When, at this time, the
Sidpa Bardo is dawning upon me [or upon oneself]’, is that now thou
art wandering in the Sidpa Bardo, As a sign of this, if thou lookest



into water, or into mirrors, thou wilt see no reflection of thy face or
body; nor doth thy body cast any shadow. Thou hast discarded now
thy gross material body of flesh and blood. These are the indications
that thou art wandering about in the Sidpa Bardo.

At this time, thou must form, without distraction, one single resolve
in thy mind. The forming of one single resolve is very important now.
It is like directing the course of a horse by the use of the reins.

Whatever thou desirest will come to pass. Think not upon evil
actions which might turn the course [of thy mind]. Remember thy
[spiritual] relationship with the Reader of this Bardo T/wdol, or with
any one from whom thou hast received teachings, initiation, or spiritual
authorization for reading religious texts while in the human world; and
persevere in going on with good acts: this is very essential. Be not
distracted. The boundary line between going upwards or going
downwards is here now. If thou givest way to indecision for even a
second, thou wilt have to suffer misery for a long, long time. This is
the moment. Hold fast to one single purpose. Persistently join up the
chain of good acts.

Thou hast come now to the time of closing the womb—door. 1 This
is a time when earnestness and pure love are necessary’, which
implieth that now the time hath come when, first of all, the womb—
door should be closed, there being five methods of closing. Bear this
well at heart.

[THE SECOND METHOD OF CLOSING THE
WOMB—DOOR]

 
O nobly—born, at this time thou wilt see visions of males and

females in union. When thou seest them, remember to withhold thyself
from going between them. Regarding the

father and mother as thy Guru and the Divine Mother,1meditate upon
them and bow down; humbly exercise thy faith; offer up mental
worship with great fervency; and resolve that thou wilt request [of



them] religious guidance.
By that resolution alone, the womb ought certainly to be closed; but

if it is not closed even by that, and thou findest thyself ready to enter
into it, meditate upon the Divine Guru Father—Mother,2 as upon any
tutelary deity, or upon the Compassionate Tutelary and Shakti\ and
meditating upon them, worship them with mental offerings. Resolve
earnestly that thou wilt request [of them] a boon. By this, the womb—
door ought to be closed.

[THE THIRD METHOD OF CLOSING THE
WOMB—DOOR]

 
Still, if it be not closed even by that, and thou findest thyself ready

to enter the womb, the third method of repelling attachment and
repulsion is hereby shown unto thee :

There are four kinds of birth: birth by egg, birth by womb,
supernormal birth,3 and birth by heat and moisture.4 Amongst these
four,6 birth by egg and birth by womb agree in character.

As above said, the visions of males and females in union will
appear. If, at that time, one entereth into the womb through the
feelings of attachment and repulsion, one may be born either as a
horse, a fowl, a dog, or a human being.6

If [about] to be born as a male, the feeling of itself being a male
dawneth upon the Knower, and a feeling of intense hatred towards the
father and of jealousy and attraction towards the mother is begotten.
If [about] to be born as a female, the feeling of itself being a female
dawneth upon the Knower, and a feeling of intense hatred towards the
mother and of intense attraction and fondness towards the father is
begotten. Through this secondary cause—[when] entering upon the
path of ether, just at the moment when the sperm and the ovum are
about to unite—the Knower experienceth the bliss of the
simultaneously—born state, during which state it fainteth away into
unconsciousness. [Afterwards] it findeth itself encased in oval form, in
the embryonic state, and upon emerging from the womb and opening



its eyes it may find itself transformed into a young dóg. Formerly it
had been a human being, but now if it have become a dog it findeth
itself undergoing sufferings in a dog’s kennel; or [perhaps] as a young
pig in a pigsty, or as an ant in an ant—hill, or as an insect, or a grub in
a hole, or as a calf, or a kid, or a lamb,1 from which shape there is no
[immediate] returning. Dumbness, stupidity, and miserable intellectual
obscurity are suffered, and a variety of sufferings experienced. In like
manner, one may wander into hell, or into the world of unhappy ghosts,
or throughout the Six Lokas, and endure inconceivable miseries.

Those who are voraciously inclined towards this [i. e. sangsaric
existence], or those who do not at heart fear it,—O dreadful! O
dreadful! Alas!—and those who have not received a guru’s

teachings, will fall down into the precipitous depths of the Sangsāra in
this manner, and suffer interminably and unbearably. Rather than meet
with a like fate, listen thou unto my words and bear these teachings of
mine at heart.

Reject the feelings of attraction or repulsion, and remember one
method of closing the womb—door which I am going to show to thce.
Close the womb—door and remember the opposition. This is the time
when earnestness and pure love arc necessary. As hath been said,
‘Abandon jealousy, and meditate upon the Guru Father—Mother’

As above explained, if to be born as a male, attraction towards the
mother and repulsion towards the father, and if to be born as a female,
attraction towards the father and repulsion towards the mother,
together with a feeling of jealousy [for one or the other] which ariseth,
will dawn upon thee.

For that time there is a profound teaching. O nobly—born, when the
attraction and repulsion arise, meditate as follows:

‘Alas! what a being of evil karma am I! That I have wandered in
the Sangsāra hitherto, hath been owing to attraction and repulsion. If
I still go on feeling attraction and repulsion, then I shall wander in
endless Sangsāra and suffer in the Ocean of Misery for a long, long
time, by sinking therein. Now I must not act through attraction and
repulsion. Alas, for me! Henceforth I will never act through attraction
and repulsion.1

Meditating thus, resolve firmly that thou wilt hold on to that



[resolution]. It hath been said, in the Tantras, ‘The door of the womb
will be closed up by that alone/

O nobly—born, be not distracted. Hold thy mind one—pointedly
upon that resolution.

[THE FOURTH METHOD OF CLOSING THE
WOMB—DOOR]

 
Again, even if that doth not close the womb, and one findeth

[oneself] ready to enter the womb, then by means of the teaching
[called] * The Untrue and the Illusory’1

the womb should be closed. That is to be meditated as follows:
‘O, the pair, the father and the mother, the black rain, the storm—

blasts, the clashing sounds, the terrifying apparitions, and all the
phenomena, are, in their true nature, illusions. Howsoever —they may
appear, no truth is there [in them]; all substances are unreal and false.
Like dreams and like apparitions are they; they are non—permanent;
they have no fixity. What advantage is there in being attached [to
them]! What advantage is there in having fear and terror of them! It is
the seeing of the non—existent as the existent. All these are
hallucinations of one’s own mind. The illusory mind itself doth not exist
from eternity; therefore where should these external [phenomena]
exist ?

‘I, by not having understood these [things] in that way hitherto, have
held the non—existent to be the existent, the unreal to be the real, the
illusory to be the actual, and have wandered in the Sangsāra so long.
And even now if I do not recognize them to be illusions, then,
wandering in the Sangsāra for long ages, [I shall be] certain to fall
into the morass of various miseries.

‘Indeed, all these are like dreams, like hallucinations, like echoes,
like the cities of the Odour—eaters,1 like mirage, like mirrored forms,
like phantasmagoria, like the moon seen in water—not real even for a
moment. In truth, they are unreal; they are false.’



By holding one—pointedly to that train of thought, the belief that
they are real is dissipated ; and, that being impressed upon the inner
continuity [of consciousness], one turneth backwards: if the
knowledge of the unreality be impressed deeply in that way, the womb
—door will be closed.

[THE FIFTH METHOD OF CLOSING THE
WOMB—DOOR]

 
Still, even when this is done, if the holding [phenomena] as real

remaineth undissolved, the womb—door is not closed; and, if one be
ready to enter into the womb, thereupon one

should close the womb—door by meditating upon the Clear Light, this
being the fifth [method]. The meditation is performed as follows:

‘Lo! all substances are mine own mind;l and this mind is
vacuousness, is unborn, and unceasing.1

Thus meditating, allow the mind to rest in the uncreated [state]—
like, for example, the pouring of water into water. The mind should be
allowed its own easy mental posture, in its natural [or unmodified]
condition, clear and vibrant. By maintaining this relaxed, uncreated
[state of mind], the womb—doors of the four kinds of birth2 are sure
to be closed. Meditate thus until the closing is successfully
accomplished.

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Many very profound teachings for
closing the womb—door have been given above. It is impossible that
they should not liberate people of the highest, the average, and the
lowest intellectual capacity. If it be asked why this should be so, it is
because, firstly, the consciousness in the Bardo possessing
supernormal power of perception3 of a limited kind, whatever is
spoken to one then is apprehended. Secondly, because—although
[formerly] deaf or blind—here, at this time, all one’s faculties are
perfect, and one can hear whatever is addressed to one. Thirdly, being
continually pursued by awe and terror, one thinketh, ‘What is best?’



and, being alertly conscious, one is always coming to hear whatever
may be told to one. Since the consciousness is without a prop,4 it
immediately goeth to whatever place the mind directeth. Fourthly, it is
easy

to direct it.1 The memory2 is ninefold more lucid than before. Even
though stupid [before], at this time, by the workings of karma, the
intellect becometh exceedingly clear and capable of meditating
whatever is taught to it. [Hence the answer is], it is because it [i.e. the
Knower] possesseth these virtues.

That the performance of funeral rites should be efficacious, is,
likewise, because of that reason. Therefore, the perseverance in the
reading of the Great Bardo Thödol for forty—nine days is of the
utmost importance. Even if not liberated at one setting—face—to—
face, one ought to be liberated at another: this is why so many
different settings—face—to—face are necessary.



[THE CHOOSING OF THE WOMB—
DOOR]

 
[Instructions to the Officiant]: There are, nevertheless, many

classes of those who—though reminded, and instructed to direct their
thoughts one—pointedly—are not liberated, owing to the great force
of evil karmic obscurations, and because of being unaccustomed to
pious deeds, and of being much accustomed to impious deeds
throughout the aeons. Therefore, if the womb—door hath not been
closed ere this, a teaching also for the selection of a womb—door is
going to be given hereinafter. Now, invoking the aid of all the Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas, repeat the Refuge; and, once more calling the
deceased by name thrice, speak as follows:

O nobly—born, (so—and—so), listen. Although the above setting—
face—to—face teachings have been given one—pointedly, yet thou
hast not understood them. Therefore, if the womb—door hath not
been closed, it is almost time to assume a body. Make thy selection of
the womb [according to] this best teaching. Listen attentively, and hold
it in mind.

[THE PREMONITORY VISIONS OF THE
PLACE OF REBIRTH]

 

O nobly—born, now the signs and characteristics of the

place of birth will come. Recognize them. In observing the place of
birth, choose the continent too.1

If to be born in the Eastern Continent of Liipah, a lake adorned with
swans, male and female, [floating thereon], will be seen. Go not there.
Recollect the revulsion [against going there].2 If one goeth there,



[that] Continent—though endowed with bliss and ease—is one
wherein religion doth not predominate. Therefore, enter not therein.

If to be born in the Southern Continent of Jambu, grand delightful
mansions will be seen. Enter therein, if one is to enter.

If to be born in the Western Continent of Balang—Chod, a lake
adorned with horses, male and female, [grazing on its shores], will be
seen. Go not even there, but return here. Although wealth and
abundance are there, that being a land wherein religion doth not
prevail, enter not therein.

If to be born in the Northern Continent of Daminyan, a lake
adorned with male and female cattle, [grazing on its shores], or trees,
[round about it], will be seen. Although duration of life, and merits are
there, yet that Continent, too, is one wherein religion doth not
predominate. Therefore enter not.

These are the premonitory signs [or visions] of the taking rebirth in
those [Continents]. Recognize them. Enter not.3

If one is to be born as a deva> delightful temples [or mansions]
built of various precious metals also will be seen.4One may enter
therein; so enter therein.

If to be born as an cisura either a charming forest will be seen or
else circles of fire revolving in opposite directions. Recollect the
revulsion; and do not enter therein by any means.

If to be born amongst beasts,1 rock—caverns and deep holes in the
earth and mists will appear. Enter not therein.

If to be born amongst pretas, desolate treeless plains and shallow
caverns, jungle glades and forest wastes will be seen. If one goeth
there, taking birth as a preta, one will suffer various pangs of hunger
and thirst. Recollect the revulsion; and do not go there by any means.
Exert great energy [not to enter therein].

If to be born in Hell, songs [like wailings], due to evil karma will be
heard. [One will be] compelled to enter therein unresistingly. Lands of
gloom, black houses and white houses, and black holes in the earth,
and black roads along which one hath to go, will appear. If one goeth
there, one will enter into Hell; and, suffering unbearable pains of heat
and cold, one will be very long in getting out of it2 Go not there into the
midst of that. It hath been said,’ Exert thine energy to the utmost’: this



is needed now.

[THE PROTECTION AGAINST THE
TORMENTING FURIES]

 
O nobly—born, although one liketh it not, nevertheless, being

pursued from behind by kartnic tormenting furies,3 one feeleth
compelled involuntarily to go on; [and with] tormenting furies in the
front, and life—cutters as a vanguard leading one, and darkness and
kartnic tornadoes, and noises and snow and rain

and terrifying hail—storms and whirlwinds of icy blasts occurring,
there will arise the thought of fleeing from them.

Thereupon, by going to seek refuge because of fear, [one
beholdeth] the aforesaid visions of great mansions, rock—caverns,
earth—caverns, jungles, and lotus blossoms which close [on entering
them]; and one escapeth by hiding inside [one of such places] and
fearing to come out therefrom, and thinking, ‘To go out is not good
now*. And fearing to depart therefrom, one will feel greatly attracted
to one’s place of refuge [which is the womb]. Fearful lest, by going
out, the awe and terror of the Bardo will meet one, and afraid to
encounter them, if one hide oneself within [the place or womb
chosen], one will thereby assume a very undesirable body and suffer
various sufferings.

That [condition] is an indication that evil spirits and råk—skasas [or
demons] are interfering with one.1 For this time there is a profound
teaching. Listen ; and heed it :

At that time—when the tormenting furies will be in pursuit of thee,
and when awe and terror will be occurring—instantaneously
[visualize] either the Supreme Heruka, or Haya—griva, or Vajra—
Pāni,2 or [any other] tutelary deity if thou hast such, perfect of form,
huge of body, of massive limbs, wrathful and terrifying in appearance,
capable of reducing to dust all mischievous spirits. Visualize it
instantaneously. The gift—waves and the power of its grace will



separate thee from the tormenting furies and thou wilt obtain the
power to select the womb—door. This is the vital art of the very
profound teaching; therefore bear it thoroughly well in mind.

O nobly—born, the dhyånl and other deities are born of the power
of Samådhi [or meditation]. Pre tas [or unhappy spirits or shades] and
malignant spirits of certain orders are those who by changing their
feeling [or mental attitude] while in the Intermediate State assumed
that very shape which they thereafter retained, and became pretas,
evil spirits, and rākskasaSy possessed of the power of shape—
shifting. All

pretasy who exist in space, who traverse the sky, and the eighty
thousand species of mischievous sprites, have become so by changing
their feelings [while] in the mental—body [on the ÅWTjfø—plane].1

At this time, if one can recollect the Great Symbol [teachings]
concerning the Voidness, that will be best. If one be not trained in that,
train the [mental] powers1 into [regarding] all things as illusion [or
māyå\ Even if this be impossible, be not attracted by anything. By
meditating upon the Tutelary Deity, the Great Compassionate [One],
Buddhahood will be obtained in the Sambhoga—Kāya.



[THE ALTERNATIVE CHOOSING:
SUPERNORMAL BIRTH; OR

WOMB—BIRTH]
 

If, however, O nobly—born, thou hast, because of the influence of
karma,2 Choose accordingly.

There are two alternatives: the transference [of the consciousness
—principle] to a pure Buddha realm, and the selection of the impure
sangsaric womb—door, to be accomplished as follows:

[SUPERNORMAL BIRTH BY TRANSFERENCE
TO A PARADISE REALM]

 
In the first—the transference to a pure paradise—the projection is

directed [by thinking or meditating] thus :
‘Alas! how sorrowful it is that I, during all the innumerable kalpas

since illimitable, beginningless time, until now, have been wandering in
the Quagmire of Sangsāra ! O how painful that I have not been
liberated into Buddhahood by knowing the consciousness to be the
self1 hitherto ere this! Now doth this Sangsāra disgust me, horrify
me, sicken me; now hath the hour come to prepare to flee from it. I
myself will so act as to be born in The Happy Western Realm, at the
feet of the Buddha Amitābha,2 miraculously from amidst a lotus
blossom.’3

Thinking thus, direct the resolution [or wish] earnestly [to that
Realm]; or, likewise, to any Realm thou mayst desire,—The Pre—
eminently Happy Realm, or The Thickly—Formed Realm, or The
Realm [of Those] of Long Hair,4or The Illimitable Vihāra of the Lotus
Radiance,1 in Urgyan’s presence; or direct thy wish to any Realm



which thou desirest most, in undistracted one—pointedness [of mind].
By doing so, birth will take place in that Realm instantaneously.

Or, if thou desirest to go to the presence of Maitreya, in the Tushita
Heavens,2 by directing an earnest wish in like manner and thinking, ‘I
will go to the presence of Maitreya in the Tushita Heavens, for the
hour hath struck for me here in the Intermediate State’, birth will be
obtained miraculously inside a lotus blossom3 in the presence of
Maitreya.

[WOMB—BIRTH : THE RETURN TO THE HUMAN
WORLD]

 
If, however, such [a supernormal birth] be not possible, and one

delighteth in entering a womb or hath to enter, there is a teaching for
the selection of the womb—door of impure Sangsāra. Listen:

Looking with thy supernormal power of foresight over the
Continents, as above, choose that in which religion prevaileth and
enter therein.

If birth is to be obtained over a heap of impurities,4 a sensation that
it is sweet—smelling will attract one towards that impure mass, and
birth will be obtained thereby.

Whatsoever they [the wombs or visions] may appear to be, do not
regard them as they are [or seem]; and by not being attracted or
repelled a good womb should be chosen. In this, too, since it is
important to direct the wish, direct it thus:

‘Ah! I ought to take birth as a Universal Emperor; or as a Brahmin,
like a great sal—tree;1 or as the son of an adept in siddhic powers;2
or in a spotless hierarchical line; or in the caste of a man who is filled
with [religious] faith; and, being born so, be endowed with great merit
so as to be able to serve all sentient beings.’

Thinking thus, direct thy wish, and enter into the womb. At the
same time, emit thy gift—waves [of grace, or good—will] upon the
womb which thou art entering, [transforming it thereby] into a celestial
mansion.3 And believing that the Conquerors and their Sons [or
Bodhisattvas] of the Ten Directions,4 and the tutelary deities,



especially the Great Compassionate [One], are conferring power
thereon, pray unto Them, and enter the womb.

In selecting the womb—door thus, there is a possibility of error:
through the influence of karma, good wombs may appear bad and bad
wombs may appear good; such error is possible. At that time, too, the
art of the teaching being important, thereupon do as follows:

Even though a womb may appear good, do not be attracted ; if it
appear bad, have no repulsion towards it. To be free from repulsion
and attraction, or from the wish to take or to avoid, —to enter in the
mood of complete impartiality,—is the most profound of arts.
Excepting only for the few who have had some practical experience
[in psychical development], it is difficult to get rid of the remnants of
the disease of evil propensities.

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Therefore, if unable to part with the
attraction and repulsion, those of the least mentality and of evil karma
will be liable to take refuge amongst brutes.1The way to repel
therefrom is to call the deceased by name again, thus:

O nobly—born, if thou art not able to rid thyself of attraction and
repulsion, and know not the [art of] selecting the womb—door,
whichever of the above visions may appear, call upon the Precious
Trinity and take refuge [therein]. Pray unto the Great Compassionate
One. Walk with thy head erect. Know thyself in the Bardo. Cast
away all weakness and attraction towards thy sons and daughters or
any relations left behind thee; they can be of no use to thee. Enter
upon the White Light—[Path] of the devas, or upon the Yellow Light
—[Path]2 of human beings; enter into the great mansions of precious
metals and into the delightful gardens.

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Repeat that [address to the
deceased] seven times over. Then there should be offered ‘The
Invocation of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas’; 4 The Path of Good
Wishes Giving Protection from Fears in the Bardo’; ‘The Root Words
[or Verses] of the Bardo’; and ‘The Rescuer [or Path of Good
Wishes for Saving] from the Ambuscades [or Dangerous Narrow
Passage—Way] of the Bardo’. 3 These are to be read over thrice.
‘The Tatidol’, which liberateth the body—aggregate,4 should also be
read out. Then ‘The Rite which Conferreth of Itself Liberation in



[THE APPENDIX]
 

[In our Manuscript (but not in the Block—Print), directly following
the text of the Bardo Thödol, there are thirteen folios of rituals and
prayers (lit,’ paths of good wishes’), which all professional readers of
the Bardo Th’ódol must know, usually from memory, and apply as
needed and they are here rendered into English as follows:]

[I: THE INVOCATION OF THE BUDDHAS AND
BODHISATTVAS]

 
[Instructions to the Officiant] : The invoking of the Buddhas and

Bodhisattvas for assistance, when [any one is] dying, is [thus] :
Offer up to the Trinity whatever actual offerings can be offered [by

the dying person, or by his family], together with mentally—created
offerings; and, holding in the hand sweet—smelling incense, repeat,
with great fervency, the following :

O ye Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, abiding in the Ten Directions,2
endowed with great compassion, endowed with foreknowledge,
endowed with the divine eye, endowed with love, affording protection
to sentient beings, condescend through the power of your great
compassion to come hither; condescend to accept these offerings
actually laid out and mentally created.

O yc Compassionate Ones, ye possess the wisdom of
understanding, the love of compassion, the power of [doing]
divinedeeds and of protecting, in incomprehensible measure.
YeCompassionate Ones, (such—and—such a person) is passing
fromthis world to the world beyond. He is leaving this world.He is
taking a great leap. No friends [hath he]. Misery isgreat. [He *s
without] defenders, without protectors, withoutforces and kinsmen.
The light of this world hath set. He gocth to another place. He



entereth thick darkness. He falleth down a steep precipice. He
entereth into a jungle solitude. He is pursued by Karmic Forces. He
goeth into the Vast Silence. He is borne away by the Great Ocean. He
is wafted on the Wind of Karma, He goeth in the direction where
stability existeth not. He is caught by the Great Conflict. He is
obsessed by the Great Afflicting Spirit. He is awed and terrified by the
Messengers of the Lord of Death. Existing Karma putteth him into
repeated existence. No strength hath he. He hath come upon a time
when he hath to go alone.

O ye Compassionate Ones, defend (so—and—so) who is
defenceless. Protect him who is unprotected. Be his forces and his
kinsmen. Protect [him] from the great gloom of the Bardo. Turn him
from the red [or storm] wind of Karma. Turn him from the great awe
and terror of the Lords of Death. Save him from the long narrow
passage—way of the Bardo.

O ye Compassionate Ones, let not the force of your compassion be
weak; but aid him. Let him not go into misery [or the miserable states
of existence]. Forget not your ancient vows; and let not the force of
your compassion be weak.

O ye Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, let not the might of the method of
your compassion be weak towards this one. Catch hold of him with
[the hook of] your grace.1 Let not the sentient being fall under the
power of evil karma.

O ye Trinity, protect him from the miseries of the Bardo.2
Saying this with great humility and faith, let thyself and [all] others

[present] repeat it thrice
[II:] ‘THE PATH OF GOOD WISHES FOR SAVING FROM

THE DANGEROUS NARROW PASSAGEWAY OF THE BARDO’

is [as follows]:
[I]
O ye Conquerors and your Sons, abiding in the Ten Directions,
O ye ocean—like Congregation of the All—Good Conquerors, the

Peaceful and the Wrathful,
O ye Gurus and Devas, and ye Dākinis, the Faithful Ones,

Hearken now out of [your] great love and compassion: Obeisance,
O ye assemblage of Gurus and Dākinls, Out of your great love,



lead us along the Path.

[2]
 

When, through illusion, I and others are wandering in the
Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of undistracted listening,
reflection, and meditation,

May the Gurus of the Inspired Line lead us,

May the bands of Mothers be our rear—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of
the Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[3]
 

When, through violent anger, [we are] wandering in the
Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of the Mirror—like Wisdom,

May the Bhagavān Vajra—Sattva lead us,



May the Mother Māmaki be our rear—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of
the Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

When, through intense pride, [we are] wandering in the
Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of the Wisdom of Equality,

May the Bhagavān Ratna—Sambhava lead us,

May the Mother, She—of—the—Buddha—Eye, be our rear
—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of
the Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[5]
 

When, through great attachment, [we are] wandering in the
Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of the Discriminating Wisdom,



May the Bhagavān Amitābha lead us,

May the Mother, [She]—of—White—Raiment, be our rear
—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of
the Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[6]
 

When, through intense jealousy, [we are] wandering in the
Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of the All—Performing Wisdom,

May the Bhagavān Amogha—Siddhi lead us,

May the Mother, the Faithful Tāra, be our rear—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of
the Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[7]
 



When, through intense stupidity, [we are] wandering in the
Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of the Wisdom of Reality,

May the Bhagavān Vairochana lead us,

May the Mother of Great Space be our rear—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of
the Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[8]
 

When, through intense illusion, [we are] wandering in the Sangsarci)

Along the bright light—path of the abandonment of hallucinatory fear,
awe, and terror,

May the bands of the Bhagavāns of the Wrathful Ones lead us,

May the bands of the Wrathful Goddesses Rich—in—Space be our
rear—guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of the
Bardos

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[9]
 



When, through intense propensities, [we are] wandering in
the Sangsāra,

Along the bright light—path of the Simultaneously—born
Wisdom,

May the heroic Knowledge—Holders lead us,

May the bands of the Mothers, the Dākinis, be our rear—
guard,

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage—way of the
Bardo,

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood.

[10]
 

May the ethereal elements not rise up as enemies;

May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Blue Buddha.

May the watery elements not rise up as enemies;

May it come that we shall see the Realm of the White Buddha.

May the earthy elements not rise up as enemies;

May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Yellow Buddha.

May the fiery elements not rise up as enemies;

May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Red Buddha.

May the airy elements not rise up as enemies;



May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Green Buddha.1

May the elements of the rainbow colours not rise up as enemies;

May it come that all the Realms of the Buddhas will be seen.

May it come that all the Sounds [in the Bardo] will be known as one’s
own sounds;

May it come that all the Radiances will be known as one’s own
radiances;

May it come that the Tri—Kāya will be realized in the Bardo,

[III:] Here beginneth

‘THE ROOT VERSES OF THE SIX BARDOS’:

[1]
 

O now, when the Birthplace Bardo upon me is dawning! Abandoning
idleness—there being no idleness in [a devotee’s] life—

Entering into the Reality undistractedly, listening, reflecting, and
meditating,

Carrying on to the Path [knowledge of the true nature of]
appearances and of mind, may the Tri—Kāya be realized:

Once that the human form hath been attained,

May there be no time [or opportunity] in which to idle it [or human
life] away.

[2]

O now, when the Dream Bardo upon me is dawning!



Abandoning the inordinate corpse—like sleeping of the sleep of
stupidity,

May the consciousness undistractedly be kept in its natural state;

Grasping the [true nature of] dreams, [may I] train [myself] in the
Clear Light of Miraculous Transformation:

Acting not like the brutes in slothfulness,

May the blending of the practising of the sleep [state] and actual [or
waking] experience be highly valued [by me].1

[3]
 

O now, when the Dhyāna Bardo upon me is dawning!

Abandoning the whole mass of distractions and illusions,

May [the mind] be kept in the mood of endless undistracted Samādhiy

May firmness both in the visualizing and in the perfected [stages] be
obtained :

At this time, when meditating one—pointedly, with [all other] actions
put aside,

May I not fall under the power of misleading, stupefying passions.

[4]
 

O now, when the Bardo of the Moment of Death upon me is
dawning!

Abandoning attraction and craving, and weakness for all [worldly
things],



May I be undistracted in the space of the bright [enlightening]
teachings,2

May I [be able to] transfuse myself into the heavenly space of the
Unborn:

The hour hath come to part with this body composed of flesh and
blood;

May I know the body to be impermanent and illusory.

[5]
 

O now, when the Bardo of the Reality upon me is dawning,
Abandoning all awe, fear, and terror of all [phenomena],

May I recognize whatever appeareth as being mine own thought—
forms,

May I know them to be apparitions in the Intermediate State;

[It hath been said], ‘There arriveth a time when the chief turning—
point is reached;

Fear not the bands of the Peaceful and Wrathful, Who are thine own
thought—forms’.

[6]
 

O now, when the Bardo of [taking] Rebirth upon me is dawning!

One—pointedly holding fast to a single wish,

[May I be able to] continue the course of good deeds through
repeated efforts;1



May the womb—door be closed and the revulsion recollected: The
hour hath come when energy and pure love are needed; [May I] cast
off jealousy and meditate upon the Guru, the Father—Mother.

[7]
 

[’ O] procrastinating one, who thinketh not of the coming of death,

Devoting thyself to the useless doings of this life,

Improvident art thou in dissipating thy great opportunity;

Mistaken, indeed, will thy purpose be now if thou returnest empty—
handed [from this life]:

Since the Holy Dharma is known to be thy true need, Wilt thou not
devote [thyself] to the Holy Dharma even now?’

[EPILOGUE]
 

Thus say the Great Adepts2 in devotion.

If the chosen teaching of the guru be not borne in mind, Wilt thou not
[O shiskya] be acting even as a traitor to thyself?

It is of great importance that these Root Words be known.

[IV:] Here beginneth

‘THE PATH OF GOOD WISHES WHICH PRO—TECTETH
FROM FEAR IN THE BARDO’:

[I]

When the cast [of the dice] of my life hath become exhausted,



The relatives in this world avail me not;

When I wander alone by myself in the Bardo,

[O] ye Conquerors, Peaceful and Wrathful, exercising the power of
your compassion,

Let it come that the Gloom of Ignorance be dispelled.

[2]
 

When wandering alone, parted from loving friends,

When the shapes of mine empty thought—forms dawn upon me here,

[May the] Buddhas, exerting the power of their divine compassion,

Cause it to come that there be neither awe nor terror in the Bardo.

[3]
 

When the bright radiances of the Five Wisdoms shine upon me now,

Let it come that I, neither awed nor terrified, may recognize them to
be of myself;

When the apparitions of the Peaceful and Wrathful forms are dawning
upon me here,

Let it come that I, obtaining the assurance of fearlessness, may
recognize the Bardo.

[4]
 

When experiencing miseries, because of the force of evil karma,



Let it come that the Conquerors, the Peaceful and Wrathful, may
dispel the miseries;

When the self—existing Sound of Reality reverberates [like] a
thousand thunders,

Let it come that they be transmuted into the sounds of the Mahāyāna
Doctrines.1

[5]
 

When [I am] unprotected, [and] karmic influences have to be
followed here,

I beseech the Conquerors, the Peaceful and the Wrathful, to protect
me;

When suffering miseries, because of the karmic influence of
propensities,

Let it come that the blissful Samadhi of the Clear Light may dawn
[upon me].

[6]
 

When assuming supernormal rebirth in the Sidpa Bardo,

Let it come that the perverting revelations of Mara occur not therein;

When I arrive wheresoever I wish to,

Let it come that I experience not the illusory fright and awe from evil
karma.

[7]
 



When the roarings of savage beasts are uttered,

Let it come that they be changed into the sacred sounds of the Six
Syllables;2

When pursued by snow, rain, wind, and darkness,

Let it come that I see with the celestial eyes of bright Wisdom.

[8]
 

Let it come that all sentient beings of the same harmonious order in
the Bardo,

Without jealousy [towards one another],3 obtain birth on the higher
planes;

When [destined to] suffering from intense miseries of hunger and
thirst,

Let it come that I experience not the pangs of hunger and thirst, heat
and cold.1

[9]
 

When I behold the future parents in union,

Let it come that I behold them as the [Divine] Pair, the Conquerors,
the Peaceful and the Wrathful Father and Mother;

Obtaining the power of being born anywhere, for the good of others,

Let it come that I obtain the perfect body, adorned with the signs and
the graces.8



[10]
 

Obtaining for myself the body of a male [which is] the better,

Let it come that I liberate all who see or hear me;

Allowing not the evil kanna to follow me,

Let it come that whatever merits [be mine] follow me and be
multiplied.

[11]
 

Wherever I be born, there and then,

Let it come that I meet the Conquerors, the Peaceful and the Wrathful
Deities;

Being able to walk and to talk as soon as [I am] born,3

Let it come that I obtain the non—forgetting intellect and remember
my past life4 [or lives].

[12]

In all the various lores, great, small, and intermediate,

Let it come that I be able to obtain mastery merely upon hearing,
reflecting, and seeing;

In whatever place I be born, let it be auspicious;

Let it come that all sentient beings be endowed with happiness.

[13]
 



Ye Conquerors, Peaceful and Wrathful, in likeness to your bodies,

[Number of your] followers, duration of your life—period, limit of your
realms,

And [in likeness to the] goodness of your divine name,

Let it come that I, and others, equal your very selves in all these.

[14]
 

By the divine grace of the innumerable All—Good Peaceful and
Wrathful [Ones],

And by the gift—waves of the wholly pure Reality,

[And] by the gift—waves of the one—pointed devotion of the mystic
devotees,

Let it come that whatsoever be wished for be fulfilled here and now.
‘The Path of Good Wishes Affording Protection from Fears in the

Bardo’ is finished.

[V: THE COLOPHON]
 

[The Manuscript concludes with the following seven verses by the
lāma or scribe who compiled it, but he—faithful to the old lāmaic
teaching that the human personality should be self—abased and the
Scriptures alone exalted before the gaze of sentient creatures—has
not recorded his name:]

Through the perfectly pure intention of mine

In the making of this, through the root of the merits thereof,

[May] those protectorless sentient beings, Mothers, [Be] placed in the
State of the Buddha:1



Let the radiant glory of auspiciousness come to illuminate the world;2

Let this Book be auspicious;3

Let virtue and goodness be perfected in every way.

[Here endeth the Manuscript of the Bardo Thodol.]
1 In dedicating the whole of the spiritual merit, derived from the

task of transcribing our copy of the Bardo Thödol, to mothers,
irrespective of race or religion,to the end that they may be helped to
attain Buddhahood, the scribe testifies tothe position of respect and
honour which the democracy of Buddhism has alwaysassigned to
woman.

2 Lit.’JambudvTpa’, the proper Sanskrit name given to the realm of
humanbeings.

3 The text of this verse is Māngatan: dGeho (pron. Gewo) the
Sanskrit and the Tibetan term (each meaning ‘Let it [i.e. this Book] be
auspicious’), in apposition, suggesting that the scribe possessed at least
a limited knowledge of Sanskrit.

‘Fill up, Punnā, the orb of holy life,
E’en as on fifteenth day the full—orb’d moon.
Fill full the perfect knowledge of the Path,
And scatter all the gloom of ignorance.’—

 

Punnā, a Bhikkhunl.
Psalms of the Early Buddhists, I. iii

(Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Translation).


	cover
	Title page
	Foreword
	Preface
	C o n t e n t s
	THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD
	BOOK I - The Chikhai Bardo and the Chönyid Bardo
	PART I - The Bardo of the Moments of Death
	PART II - The Bardo of the Experiencing of Reality

	BOOK II - The Sidpa Bardo
	PART I - The After-Death World
	PART II - The Process of Rebirth - The Closing of the Door of the Womb


	Appendix
	Addenda
	Afterword
	Index



