The Story of the Ogre
Italy, Giambattista Basile
Antuono of Marigliano is turned out by his mother for being the prince of fools, and enters the service of an ogre. On wishing to return home he several times receives from this latter different presents, of which he always lets an innkeeper rob him. But at last, receiving a stick which punishes his inexperience, he makes the innkeeper pay for all the tricks he played him, and enriches his home.
They relate that once in the town of Marigliano there was a respectable woman named Masella, who, besides possessing six marriageable daughters, like six poles, had an only son so churlish and ignorant that he was no good even at the snow game [that is to say, at the simplest of games, like that of throwing snowballs]; so that she was like a sow with a headache in her mouth, and not a day passed without her saying, "What are you doing in this house, cursed good-for-nothing? Out with you, you great rascal! Clear off, Maccabeus! Vanish, bringer of bad luck! Out of my sight, chestnut eater! Would you had been changed in your cradle and instead of a little boy, of a pretty child, of a fine little lad, I had had a fine great pig!"

But with all that, Masella spoke, and he only whistled. Seeing that there was no hope of Antuono (for so was the child called) turning his mind to any good purpose, one fine day she began to wash his head without soap, and seizing a rolling pin started to take the measure of his jacket. Antuono, when he least expected it, finding himself well staked, combed, and lined, took to his heels as soon as he could escape from her hands.

So long did he journey that after twenty-four hours, when the little lamps began to illuminate the shops of Cinzia, he arrived at the foot of a mountain so high that it hit the clouds. There, by the roots of a poplar tree, near a grotto worked in pumice stone, was sitting an ogre. Gracious! How hideous he was! His body was dwarfed and deformed with a head bigger than an Indian pumpkin, a forehead full of bumps, eyebrows knitted, squint eyes, a flat nose as big as a millstone, from which came two tusks that reached his ankles, a hairy chest, arms like turning-frames, bandy-legged and broad-footed like a goose. Altogether he resembled a devil, a fiend, a hideous beggar, and an evil spirit incarnate that would have scared an Orlando, alarmed a Scannarebecco, and made the most able swordsman fall into a swoon.

But Antuono, who had not moved a sling's throw, nodded to him, and said, "Good-bye, sir! What's doing? How are you? Don't you want anything? How far is it from here to where I'm going?"

The ogre, hearing these ridiculous questions, began to laugh, and as he liked the look of the blockhead, said to him, "Do you want a master?"

Antuono replied, "How much do you want a month?"

And the ogre, "See that you serve me properly, and we shall come to terms, and you will live like a lord."

So having made this agreement, Antuono entered the service of the ogre, in whose house the food was thrown at you, and as to work, one lived like a sluggard. Thus in four days he got as fat as a Turk, as round as an ox, as bold as a cock, as red as a lobster, as green as garlic, and as large as a whale, and so sturdy and with his skin so stretched that he could hardly open his eyes.

Two years had not yet passed when all this abundance began to weary him, and there was born in him a wish and strong urge to pay a visit to Marigliano. And in pining for his little home he wasted away and nearly took on his former appearance.

The ogre, who saw into his very entrails and knew of the itch which made him go about like an unsatisfied bride, called him aside and said, "Antuono, my boy, I know you have a great longing to see your own flesh and blood again. And therefore, as I love you like the apple of my eye, I am well content that you should make this trip and satisfy your wish. Take, therefore, this ass, which will spare you the fatigue of the journey, but by careful not to say 'Hey! Void!' or by the soul of my grandfather, you will be sorry for it."

Antuono took the ass, and without even saying, "good night" jumped on it and went off at a gallop. He had not gone more than a hundred yards, however, before he dismounted from the beast and cried, "Hey! Void!"

No sooner had he opened his mouth than the little beast began to relieve itself of pearls, rubies, emeralds, sapphires, and diamonds, each as big as a walnut. Antuono stood with his mouth open a palm's breadth, gazing at this fine discharge, this superb flux, this magnificently rich dysentery of the ass. Then with great rejoicing he filled a wallet with these jewels, climbed once more into the saddle, and setting off with great energy, arrived at an inn.

On dismounting, the first thing he said to the innkeeper was, "Tie up this ass to the manger. Give it plenty to eat; but be careful not to say 'Hey! Void!' or you will regret it. And keep these trifles in a safe place."

The innkeeper, who was one of the "four of the craft" [the head of a trade corporation], and a master in cunning, when he heard this unexpected warning and saw the jewels worth millions, became curious to learn what effect these words would have. He therefore placed before Antuono an excellent dinner and gave him as much to drink as he could carry, and then had him thrust in between a straw mattress and a rough quilt. As soon as he saw him close his eyes and heard him snoring with all his might, he ran to the stable and said to the ass, "Hey! Void!" And the ass, with the medicine of these words, carried out the usual operation, relieving itself of a flux of gold and purging of jewels.

At the sight of this precious discharge, the innkeeper planned to change asses and gull that idiot of an Antuono, thinking it an easy matter to blind, deceive, bamboozle, perplex, hoodwink, throw dust in the eyes, confound, and fool a hog, blunderer, booby, dolt, simpleton such as was this fellow he had to deal with.

Antuono woke up next morning when Aurora went to empty the chamber pot of her old man, full of fine red sand, at the eastern window, and rubbing his eyes with his fists and stretching his arms for half an hour with threescore yawnings and farts by way of accompaniment, called the innkeeper, saying, "Come here, my friend: a short account and a long friendship. Friends we shall be, and war to the purses. Make out the bill and pay yourself."

Thus with so much for the bread, so much for the wine, this for the broth, that for the meat, five for the stabling, ten for the bed, and fifteen for the tip, he laid out the money. Then taking the false ass with a pouch of pumice stone in place of the precious jewels, he left at a good trot for his own town.

Arriving at Marigliano, before setting foot inside his house, he started to cry out, as if stung by nettles, "Run, mother, run, for we are rich! Unfold towels, spread out sheets, lay down coverlets, for you will now see treasures!"

The mother, full of joy, opened the chest where she kept her daughters' trousseaux and took out sheets so fine that they blew away if you but breathed, cloths of sweet-scented linen, coverlets of colors that catch the eye, and made a fine spread.

Antuono led in the ass and started so sing out, "Hey! Void!" But for all the "Hey! Voids!" he said, the ass took as much notice as of the strains of the lyre. However, he continued to repeat these words two or three times, and as they were all thrown to the winds he took up a heavy club and began to belabor the ill-starred beast. He flogged and thrashed the poor animal so much till its body began to loosen, and it emitted a fine yellow discharge on the white sheets.

At this sight the unfortunate Masella, who had hoped fundamentally to alleviate her poverty, and now found instead another kind of fundament so liberal that it scented the whole house, took up a stick and without giving Antuono time to show her the pumice stone, administered to him a sound thrashing.

He fled as fast as he could in the direction of the ogre. The ogre saw him coming more at a trot than walking and, being a magician, knew what had happened. So he gave him a good scolding for letting himself be cheated by an innkeeper, calling him feeble minded, only fit to be tied to his mother's apron strings, idiot, dunce, fool, ninny, boor, who in exchange for an ass rich in treasure had accepted a beast prolific of ordinary excrement. Antuono swallowed the pill, and swore that never never again would he let himself be mocked or cheated by any living soul.

After a year, however, there was renewed in him the same painful longing, and he languished with the desire to see his people again. The ogre, who was ugly of face but kindly of heart, gave him leave this time too, and made him a present of a fine napkin, saying, "Take this to your mother, but mind now, don't behave like a dolt as you did about the ass. And until you reach home don't say either 'Open' or 'Shut, napkin,' for if some misfortune befalls you, it will be your own fault. Now go, and good luck go with you. Come back soon."

Antuono departed, but he had not gone far from the grotto before he put the napkin on the ground, and said, "Open, napkin!" And it opened, and at once there appeared a whole heap of costly objects, finery, and precious things of all kinds, the most beautiful and wonderful imaginable. Antuono then exclaimed, "Shut, napkin!" and folding everything up in it, he made his way to the same inn as the time before. Arriving there, he said to the innkeeper, "Take this napkin and look after it for me, but be careful not to say 'Open' or 'Shut, napkin.'"

The latter, who was a sly knave, answered, "Leave it to me," and having given him plenty to eat and making him catch the monkey by the tail [getting him drunk], sent him off to sleep. Then he took the napkin and uttering the words found himself looking at enough precious things to amaze him. He therefore found another napkin so alike as to appear exactly the same, and made the exchange.

Antuono, having woken up, set off at a good trot and arrived as his mother's house, where he started to cry out, "Now at last we shall be able to laugh at the whole of beggardom! Now shall we put an end to our wants, our rags and tatters!" and spreading the napkin on the ground, said, "Open, napkin!" But he could go on repeating it from today till tomorrow, for, as it gave not the slightest sign of opening, it was all a waste of time.

Then, seeing that things were going wrong, he said to his mother, "May the heavens be blessed! The innkeeper has done me again. But let it be, for he and I make two. Better for him that he had never been born. Better that he had fallen under cart wheels. May I lose my greatest treasure if the next time I pass his inn I don't smash his glasses, plates, and dishes to atoms to pay for his having stolen my ass and jewels."

But his mother, hearing these fresh stupidities, flamed up in anger, crying, "Go, break you neck, accursed son! Fracture your collarbone! Away, out of my sight! for I see my entrails, and I can stand you no longer, as my gorge rises each time you come near me! Be off with you, and may this house burn you like fire! I wash my hands of you, and think of you as if I had never brought you into the world."

The unfortunate Antuono, seeing the lightning, had no wish to wait for the thunder. And like one who has stolen clothes from a heap of washing, lowering his head and raising his heels, he vanished in the direction of the ogre.

When the ogre saw him creeping in slowly as slowly and softly as softly he gave him another good dressing down, saying, "I don't know what keeps me from tearing out your eyes, gasbag, windy mouth, lump of putrid flesh, hen's arse, tattle, trumpet of the Vicaria [a town crier], noising every blessed thing abroad, vomiting whatever is in you without ever being able to retain the husks! If you had kept quiet at the inn, all this would not have happened to you. But you've got a tongue like the sail of a windmill, and now you've crushed the prosperity that was once yours."

The miserable Antuono put his tail between his legs and swallowed the music, and for over three years remained quietly in the service of the ogre, thinking no more of his home than of becoming a lord. However, after this period, he was seized with another attack of tertian fever, with a longing to return home, and begged the ogre to give him leave. And the ogre, overruled by his importunities, consented to let him go and gave him a finely worked club with the warning, "Take this club in memory of me. But remember not to say, 'Up, stick!' or 'Down stick!' for my only wish is to share things with you."

Antuono, taking it, replied, "Enough, for now I have grown my wisdom teeth and know how many pairs make three oxen. I am a boy no longer, and anyone who wants to cheat Antuono must kiss his own elbow first."

The ogre answered, "The work praises the worker. Words are women and deeds are men. We shall see! You have heard me more than a deaf man. A man forewarned is a man half saved!"

The ogre was still talking when Antuono hurried off to his home. He had not gone half a mile before he cried, "Up, stick!"

It was not mere word but a magic charm! The club, as if it had an imp in its marrow, started to work at once like a turner's lathe about the shoulders of the unhappy Antuono. The blows fell from an open sky one after the other without stopping. The poor fellow, seeing himself drubbed and beaten like a Cordovan hide, cried out, "Down, stick!" and the club stopped playing its counterpoint on the staff-lines of his spine.

So, having learnt at his own expense, he said, "Bad luck to anyone that flies! I won't let it escape me this time! The one that's in for a bad time hasn't gone to bed yet!"

With these thoughts he arrived at the same inn and was received with the best welcome in the world, for the innkeeper knew what sauce was to be had from that pigskin.

Antuono said to him, "Here, keep this stick for me, but be careful not to say 'Up, stick!' or it will be the worse for you. Take heed. Don't complain any more of Antuono, for I warn you, and make the bed beforehand."

The innkeeper, well content as this third piece of good luck, crammed him full of soup and made him see the bottom of the pitcher. And as soon as he had put him to bed, half asleep already, he ran to take the stick, calling to his wife to come and see the show.

"Up, stick!" he cried, and at once it began to test the ballast of the innkeepers, with a whack here and a whack there, administering a sound beating of the first order. Finally, finding themselves in such a bad way, the husband and wife, pursued by the stick, ran off to wake Antuono and beg him for mercy.

Antuono, who saw that the affair had been a huge success, that the macaroni had fallen into the cheese and the broccoli into the lard, said, "There's no way of stopping it! You'll be beaten to death with blows unless you return my things to me."

The innkeeper, who was a mass of bruises, cried, "Take everything I have, only deliver me from this cursed plague on my shoulders." And in order to prove his words, he had all the things fetched that he had stolen from him.

When Antuono had go the lot, he cried "Down, stick!" and it lay quietly on one side.

Then taking with him the donkey and the other things, Antuono returned to his mother's house, where he made a right royal trial of the ass's backside and a sure test of the napkin. He amassed a pile of money, married off his sisters, enriched his mother, and proved the truth of the saying:

God helps boys and madmen.
