






































Metamorphorses-Ovid-15books


The Voyage of Mael Duin's 
Boat

Immram curaig Maíle Duin
LU, YBL, Harl. 5280, Eg. 1782

Translated by Whitley Stokes

PROLOGUE
"Three  years  and  seven  months  was  it 

wandering in the ocean."
here was a famous man of the Eoganacht 

of Ninuss (that is, the Eoganacht of the Arans): 
his name was Ailill of the "Edge of Battle." A 
mighty soldier was he, and a hero lord of his 
own tribe and kindred. And there was a young 
nun,  the  prioress  of  a  church  of  nuns,  with 
whom he met. Between them both there was a 
noble boy, Mael Duin, son of Ailill.

This is the way according to which Mael 
Duin's conception and his birth came to pass. 
Once upon a time the king of the Eoganacht 
went  on  a  raid  into  another  district  and 
province and with him fared Ailill of the Edge 
of Battle. They unyoked and encamped on an 
upland  therein.  There  was  a  church  of  nuns 
near to that upland. At midnight, then, when 
everyone had ceased moving in the camp, Ailill 
went to the church. It was the hour that the 



(aforesaid)  nun  went  to  strike  the  bell  for 
nocturne. Ailill caught her hand, and threw her 
down, and lay with her.

Said the woman to him: "Unblessed is our 
state." Saith she: "(for) this is the time for my 
conceiving. Which is thy race and what is thy 
name?"

Said the hero: "Ailill of the Edge of Battle 
is  my  name (and  I  am)  of  the  Eoganacht  of 
Ninuss in Thomond."

Then after ravaging and taking hostages, 
the  king  returned  to  his  district,  Ailill  also 
being with him.

Soon  after  Ailill  had  reached  his  tribe, 
marauders of Leix slew him. They burnt (the 
church named) Dubcluain upon him.

At  the  end  of  nine  months  the  woman 
brought  forth  a  boy,  and  gave  him  a  name, 
Mael  Duin  was  he.  The  boy  was  afterwards 
taken secretly to her friends, even to the king's 
queen; and by her Mael Duin was reared; and 
she gave out that she was his mother.

Now the  one  foster-mother  reared  him 
and the king's three sons, in one cradle, and on 
one breast, and on one lap.

Beautiful, indeed, was his form; and it is 
doubtful  if  there has been in flesh anyone as 
beautiful  as  he.  So  he  grew up  till  he  was  a 
young  warrior  and  fit  to  use  weapons.  Great 
then, was his brightness and his gaiety and his 
playfulness.  In  his  play  he  outwent  all  his 
comrades, both in throwing balls and running, 



and  leaping,  and  putting  stones,  and  racing 
horses. He had, in sooth, the victory in each of 
those games. One day, then, a certain soldier 
warrior grew envious against him, and he said 
in  transport  and  anger:  "Thou,"  saith  he, 
"whose clan and kindred no one knows, whose 
mother  and  fa ther  no -one  knows , 
vanquish us in  every  game,  whether  we 
contend with you on land or on water, or on 
the draughtboard!"

So then Mael Duin was silent, for till then 
he had thought that he was a son of the king 
and of the queen his  foster-mother.  Then he 
said to his foster-mother: "I will not dine and I 
will not drink until thou tell me," saith he, "my 
mother and my father." "But," saith she, "why 
art thou inquiring after that? Do not take to 
heart the words of the haughty warriors. I am 
thy mother." Saith she: "The love of the people 
of the earth for their sons is  no greater than 
the love I bear to you."

"That  may  be"  he  said:  "nevertheless, 
make known my parents to me."

So his foster-mother went with him, and 
delivered  him into  his  (own)  mother's  hand; 
and  thereafter  he  entreated  his  mother  to 
declare his father to him.

"Silly," saith she, "is what you art adoing, 
for if you shouldst know thy father you hast no 
good of him, and you shalt be the gladder, for 
he died long ago."

"Tis the better for me to know it," saith 



he, "however."
Then  his  mother  told  him  the  truth. 

"Ailill  of  the  Edge of  Battle  was  thy  father," 
saith she, "of the Eoganacht of Ninuss."

Then Mael  Duin  went  to  his  fatherland 
and  to  his  own  heritage,  having  his  (three) 
foster-brothers with him; and beloved warriors 
were  they.  And  then  his  kindred  welcomed 
him, and bade him be of good cheer.

At a certain time afterwards there was a 
number  of  warriors  in  the  graveyard  of  the 
church of Dubcluain, putting stones. So Mael 
Duin's foot was planted on the scorched ruin 
of the church, and over it he was flinging the 
stone.  A  certain  poison-tongued  man  of  the 
community  of  the  church,  Briccne  was  his 
name,  said  to  Mael  Duin:  "It  were  better," 
saith  he,"  to  avenge  the  man who was  burnt 
there than to cast stones over his bare burnt 
bones."

"Who (was) that ?" saith Mael Duin.
"Ailill," saith he, "thine (own) father."
"Who killed him ?" asked Mael Duin.
Briccne  replied:  "Marauders  of  Leix," 

saith he, "and they destroyed him on this spot."
Then  Mael  Duin  threw  away  the  stone 

(which  he  was  about  to  cast),  and  took  his 
mantle round him, and his armour on him; and 
he was mournful thereat. And he asked the way 
to wend to Leix, and the guides told him that 
he could only go by sea.

So  he  went  into  the  country  o f 



Corcomroe to seek a charm and a blessing of 
the wizard who dwelt there, to begin building a 
boat.  (Nuca  was  the  wizard's  name and  it  is 
from him that  Boirenn  Nuca  is  named).  He 
told  Mael  Duin  the  day  on  which  he  should 
begin  the  boat,  and the  number  of  the  crew 
that should go in her, to wit, seventeen men, or 
sixty  according  to  others.  And  he  (also)  told 
him that no number greater or less than that 
should go; and he (lastly) told him the day he 
should set to sea.

Then  Mael  Duin  built  a  three-skinned 
boat;  and  they  who  were  to  go  in  it  in  his 
company  were  ready.  German  was  there  and 
Diuran the Rhymer. So then he went to sea on 
the day that the wizard had told him to set out. 
When they had gone a  little  from land after 
hoisting the sail,  then came into the harbour 
after them his three foster-brothers, the three 
sons of his foster-father and foster-mother; and 
they shouted to them to come back again to 
them to the end that they might go with them.

"Get  you  home,"  saith  Mael  Duin;  "for 
even though we should return (to land),  only 
the number we have here shall go with me."

"We will go after thee into the sea and be 
drowned therein, unless thou come unto us."

Then the three of  them cast  themselves 
into  the  sea,  and  they  swam  far  from  land. 
When Mael Duin saw that, he turned towards 
them so that they might not be drowned, and 
he brought them into his boat.



I
That day till vespers they were a-rowing, 

and the night after it till midnight, when they 
found two small bare islands, with two forts in 
them; and then they heard out of the forts the 
noise  and  outcry  of  intoxication,  and  the 
soldiers,  and the trophies. And this was what 
one man said to the other: "stand off from me," 
saith he, "for I am a better hero than thou, for 
it, is I that slew Ailill of the Edge of Battle, and 
burnt  Dubcluain  on  him  and  no  evil  hath 
hitherto  been  done  to  me  therefor  by  his 
kindred; and thou hast never done the like of 
that!"

"We have the victory in our hands," saith 
German, and saith Diuran the Rhymer: "God 
hath brought  us  direct  and God hath guided 
our  barque.  Let  us  go  and  wreck  these  two 
forts,  since  God  hath  revealed  to  us  our 
enemies in them!"

As they were saying these words, a great 
wind  came  upon,  them,  so  that  they  were 
driven  (over  the  sea,  all)  that  night  until 
morning. And even after morning they saw nor 
earth nor land, and they knew not whither they 
were going. Then said Mael Duin: "Leave the 
boat still, without rowing and whither soever it 
shall please God to bring it, bring."

Then  they  entered  the  great,  endless 
ocean;  and  Mael  Duin  afterwards  said  to  his 
foster-brothers:  "Ye  have  caused  this  to  us, 



casting yourselves upon us in the boat in spite 
of the word of the enchanter and wizard, who 
told us that on board the boat we should go 
only  the  number  that  we  were  before  you 
came."

They had no answer, save only to be silent 
for a little space.

II
Three  days  and  three  nights  were  they, 

and they found neither land nor ground. Then 
on the morning of the third day they heard a 
sound from the north-east. "This is the voice of 
a wave against a shore," said Mael Duin. Now 
when  the  day  was  bright  they  made  towards 
land. As they were casting lots to see which of 
them should go on shore, there came a great 
swarm of ants each of them the size of a foal, 
down to the strand towards them, and into the 
sea. What the ants desired was to eat the crew 
and their boat: so the sailors fled for three days 
and  three  nights;  and  they  saw nor  land  nor 
ground.

III
On the morning of the third day the heard 

the sound of a wave against the beach, and with 
the daylight they saw an island high and great; 
and terraces all round about it. Lower was each 
of them than the other, and there was a row of 
trees around it, and many great birds on these 
trees. And they were taking counsel as to who 



should go to explore the island and see whether 
the birds were gentle.  "I  will  go,"  saith Mael 
Duin. So Mael Duin went, and warily searched 
the, island, and found nothing evil therein. And 
they ate their fill of the birds and brought some 
of them on board their boat.

IV
Three  days  thereafter,  and  three  nights 

were they at  sea.  But on the morning of  the 
fourth day they perceived another great island. 
Sandy  was  its  soil.  When  they  came  to  the 
shore of the island they saw therein a beast like 
a  horse.  The  legs  of  a  hound  he  had,  with 
rough,  sharp  nails;  and  great  was  his  joy  at 
seeing  them.  And he  was  prancing  (?)  before 
them, for he longed to devour them and their 
boat. "He is not sorry to meet us," saith Mael 
Duin;  "let  us  go back from the island."  That 
was done; and when the beast perceived them 
fleeing, he went down to the strand and, began 
digging up the beach with his sharp nails, and 
pelting them (with the pebbles),  and they did 
not expect to escape from him.

V
Thereafter  they rowed afar,  and a  great, 

flat  island  they  see  before  them.  Then  to 
German fell  an ill  lot  to go and look at  that 
island.  "Both of us will  go,"  saith Diuran the 
Rhymer,  "and thou wilt  come with me some 
other time into an island which it falls to my 



lot to explore." So the two of them entered the 
island. Great was its size and its breadth, and 
they saw therein a long, great green, with vast 
hoof-marks of horses upon it. As large as the 
sail of a ship was the mark of the hoof of each 
horse. They saw, moreover, the shells of huge 
nuts  like  ***  and  they  saw,  there,  also  great 
leavings  (?)  of  the  plunder  of  many  men.  So 
they  dreaded  that  which  they  saw,  and  they 
called their  people to them to see what they 
beheld.  They  were  afraid  then,  after  seeing 
what they beheld, and they all, swiftly, hastily, 
went on board their boat.

When they  had gone a  little  from land, 
they beheld (rushing) along the sea to the island 
a  great  multitude,  which,  after  reaching  the 
green  of  the  island,  held  a  horse-race.  And 
swifter than the wind was each horse, and great 
was the shouting (of the multitude)  and their 
outcry and noise. And then the strokes of their 
horse-rods at the meeting were heard by Mael 
Duin,  and  he  heard,  moreover,  what  each  of 
them was saying: "Bring the grey steed"; "Drive 
the  dun  horse  there"  ;  "Bring  the  white 
horse!" ; "My steed is faster!" ; "My horse leaps 
better."

When the wanderers heard those words, 
they went away with all  their  might for  they 
felt  sure  it  was  a  meeting  of  demons  they 
beheld.

VI



A full week were they voyaging, in hunger 
and  in  thirst,  when  they  discovered  a  great, 
high island with a great house therein on the 
seashore and a doorway out of the house into 
the  plain  of  the  island  and  another  door 
(opening)  into  the  sea,  and against  that  door 
there  was  a  valve  of  stone.  That  valve  was 
pierced by an aperture, through which the sea-
waves were flinging the salmon into the midst 
of that house. Mael Duin and his men entered 
that  house,  and  therein  they  found  no  one. 
After this they beheld a testered bed for the 
chief of the house alone, and a bed for every 
three  of  his  household,  and  food  for  three 
before  every  bed,  and  a  vessel  of  glass  with 
good liquor before every bed and a cup of glass 
on every vessel. So they dined off that food and 
liquor and they give thanks to Almighty God, 
who had helped them from their hunger.

VII
When  they  went  from  the  island  they 

were  a  long  while  voyaging,  without  food, 
hungrily, till they found (another) island, with a 
great cliff  round it on every side, and therein 
was  a  long,  narrow  wood,  and  great  was  its 
length  and its  narrowness.  When Mael  Duin 
reached that wood he took (from it)  a rod in 
his hand as he passed it. Three days and three 
nights the rod remained in his hand, while the 
boat was under sail, coasting the cliff,  and on 
the third day he found a cluster, of three apples 



at the end of the rod. For forty nights each of 
these apples sufficed them.

VIII
Thereafter,  then,  they  found  another 

island, with a fence of stone around it. When 
they drew near it a huge beast sprang up in the 
island,  and raced round about  the  island.  To 
Mael  Duin  it  seemed  swifter  than  the  wind. 
And then it  went to the height of the island 
and  there  it  performed  (the  feat  called) 
'straightening of body', to wit, its head below 
and its  feet  above;  and thus it  used to be:  it 
turned  in  its  skin  that  is,  the  flesh  and  the 
bones  revolved,  but  the  skin  outside  was 
unmoved. Or at another time the skin outside 
turned  like  a  mill,  the  bones  and  the  flesh 
remaining still.

When it had been for long in that wise, it 
sprang  up  again  and  raced  round  about  the 
island as it had done at first. Then it returned 
to the same place; and this time the lower half 
of  its  skin  was  unmoved,  and  the  other  half 
above  ran  round  and  round  like  a  millstone. 
That, then, was its practice when it was going 
round the island.

Mael  Duin  and  his  people  fled  with  all 
their  might,  and  the  beast  perceived  them 
fleeing  and  it  went  into  the  beach  to  seize 
them, and began to smite them, and it cast and 
lashed after them with stones of the harbour. 
Now one of these stones came into their boat, 



and pierced  through Mael  Duin's  shield,  and 
lodged in the keel of the curragh.

IX
Now  not  long  after  that  they  found 

another lofty island, and it was delightful, and 
therein  were  many  great  animals  like  unto 
horses. Each of them would take a piece out of 
another's side, and carry it away with its skin 
and its flesh, so that out of their sides streams 
of  crimson blood were  breaking,  and thereof 
the ground was full.

So  they  left  that  island  swiftly,  madly, 
hastily (and they were) sad, complaining, feeble; 
and they knew nothing whither  in  the world 
they were going and in what stead they should 
find aidance or land or ground.

X
Now they  came to  another  great  island, 

after  great  weariness  of  hunger  and  thirsting 
and they sad and sighing, having lost all hope of 
aidance.  In that  island were many trees:  full-
fruited  were  they,  with  great  golden  apples 
upon them. Red short animals like swine were 
under  those  trees.  Now,  they  used  to  go  to 
those  trees  and  strike  them with  their  hind-
legs,  so  that  the  apples  would  fall  from the 
trees,  and  then  they  would  consume  them. 
From  dawn  to  sunset  the  animals  did  not 
appear  at  all,  but  they  used  to  stay  in  the 
caverns of the ground. Round about that island 



many birds were swimming out on the waves. 
From Matins to None further and further they 
used to swim from the island. But from None 
to  Vespers  nearer  and  nearer  they  used  to 
come  to  the  island,  and  arrive  therein  after 
sunset.

Then they used to strip off the apples and 
eat them. "Let us go," saith Mael Duin, "into 
the island wherein the birds are. Not harder for 
us (to do so) than for the birds." *** One of the 
crew went to see the island, and he called his 
comrade to him on shore. Hot was the ground 
under their feet, and they could not dwell there 
for its warmth, because it was a fiery land, and 
the  animals  used  to  heat  the  ground  above 
them.

On the first day they brought with them a 
few of  the  apples  which  they  were  eating  in 
their boat. When the morning was bright the 
birds  went  from the island swimming to sea. 
With  that  the  fiery  animals  were  up-raising 
their heads out of the, caves, and kept eating 
the apples till  sundown. When they were put 
back into their caves the birds use to come in 
place  of  them,  to  eat  the apples.  Then Mael 
Duin went with his people, and they collected 
all the apples that were there that night. Alike 
did the apples  forbid hunger  and thirst  from 
them. So then they filled their boat with the 
apples as seemed good to them, and went again 
to sea.



XI
Now when those apples  failed and their 

hunger  and thirst  were  great  and when their 
mouths and their noses were full of the stench 
of the sea, they sighted an island which was not 
large, and therein (stood) a fort surrounded by, 
a  white,  high  rampart  as  if  it  were  built  of 
burnt lime, or as if it were all one rock of chalk. 
Great  was  its  height  from the  sea:  it  all  but 
reached the clouds.  The fort  was  open wide. 
Round  the  rampart  were  great,  snow-white 
houses. When they entered the largest of these 
they saw no one there, save a small cat which 
was in the midst of the house playing on the 
four  stone  pillars  that  were  there.  It  was 
leaping, from each pillar to the other. It looked 
a little at the men, and did not stop itself from 
its play. After that, they saw three rows on the 
wall of the house round about, from one door 
post  to  the  other.  A  row  there,  first,  of 
brooches of gold and of silver, with their pins 
in the wall, and a row of neck-torques of gold 
and of silver:  like hoops of a vat was each of 
them. The third row (was) of great swords, with 
hilts of gold and of silver, The rooms were full 
of white quilts and shining garments. A roasted 
ox moreover, and a flitch in the midst of the 
house, and great vessels with good intoxicating 
liquor. "Hath this been left for us?" saith Mael 
Duin to the cat. It looked at him suddenly and 
began  to  p lay  aga in .  Then  Mael  Duin 
recognised that it was for them that the dinner 



had been left.
So they dined and drank and slept. They 

put the leavings (?) of the liquor into the pots 
and stored up the leavings (?) of the food. Now 
when they proposed to go, Mael Duin's third 
foster-brother  said:  "shall  I  take  with  me  a 
necklace of these necklaces?" "Nay," saith Mael 
Duin,  "not  without  guard  is  the  house." 
Howbeith he took it as far as the middle of the 
enclosure.  The  cat  followed  them,  and  leapt 
through  him (the  foster-brother)  like  a  fiery 
arrow, and burnt him so that he became ashes, 
and (then)  went back till  it  was  on its  pillar. 
Then  Mael  Duin  soothed  the  cat  with  his 
words,  and  set  the  necklace  in  its  place  and 
cleansed  the  ashes  from  the  floor  of  the 
enclosure, and cast them on the shore of the 
sea.

Then  they  went  on  board  their  boat, 
praising and, magnifying the Lord.

XII
Early  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day 

after  that  they  espy  another  island,  with  a 
brazen  palisade  over  the  midst  of  it  which 
divided the island in two, and they espied great 
flocks of sheep therein, even a black flock on 
this side of the fence and a white flock on the 
far side. And they saw a big man separating the 
flocks.  When he used to  fling a  white  sheep 
over the fence from this side to the black sheep 
it became black at once. So, when he used to 



cast  a  black  sheep  over  the  fence  to  the  far 
side, it became white at once. The men were 
adread at seeing that. "This were well for us (to 
do)" saith Mael Duin: "let us cast two rods into 
the island. If they change colour we (also) shall 
change if  we land on it." So they flung a rod 
with black bark on the side wherein were the 
white  sheep,  and  it  became  white  at  once. 
Then they flung a peeled white rod on the side 
wherein  were  the black sheep and it  became 
black at once.

"Not fortunate (?)  was that experiment," 
saith Mael Duin. "Let us not land on the island. 
Doubtless  ours  colour  would  not  have  fared 
better than the rods."

They went back from the island in terror. 
On  the  third  day  afterwards  they  perceived 
another island great and wide, with a herd of 
beautiful swine. therein. Of these they killed a 
small pig. Then they were unable to carry it to 
be  roasted  so  they  all  came  round,  it.  They 
cooked it and bore it into their boat.

Then  they  saw a  great  mountain  in  the 
island, and they proposed to go and view the 
island from it. Now when Diuran the Rhymer 
and German went to visit  the mountain they 
found before them a broad river which was not 
deep. Into this river German dipped the handle 
of his spear and at once it was consumed as if 
fire had burnt it. And (so) they went no further. 
Then, too, they saw, on the other side of the 
river,  great  hornless  oxen  lying  down,  and  a 



huge man sitting by them. German after this 
struck  his  spear-shaft  against  his  shield.  to 
frighten the oxen. "Why dost thou frighten the 
silly calves?" saith that huge herdsman. "Where 
are  the  dams  of  these  calves"  saith  German. 
"They  are  on  the  other  side  of  yonder 
mountain," saith he Diuran and German return 
to their comrades, and tell them the tidings.

So thence they (all) went.

XIV
Not long thereafter they found an island, 

with a great hideous mill, wherein was a miller 
huge *** hideous. They asked him "what mill is 
this?" "Not *** indeed," saith he "*** asks what 
ye shall not know." "Nay" say they. "Half the 
corn of your country," saith he, "is ground here. 
Every  thing  which  is  begrudged  is  ground in 
this mill" saith he.

With that  they  see  the  heavy,  countless 
loads on horses, and, human beings (going) to 
the mill and from it, again; only that what was 
brought  from it  was  carried  westward.  Again 
they asked:  "What is  the name of this  mill?" 
"Inber  Tre-cenand,"  saith  the  miller.  Then 
after this they signed themselves with the sign 
of Christ's cross. When they heard and saw all 
these things they went on their way, into their 
boat.

XV
Now when they went from that island of 



the mill they found a large island, and a great 
multitude of human beings therein. Black were 
these, both in bodies and raiment. Fillets round 
their heads, and they rested not from wailing. 
An unlucky lot fell to one of Mael Duin's two 
foster-brothers to land on the island. When he 
went to the people who were wailing he at once 
became a comrade of theirs and began to weep 
along with them. Two were sent to bring him 
thence,  and  they  did  not  recognise  him 
amongst  the  others  (and)  they  themselves 
turned to lament. Then said Mael Duin: "Let 
four (of you)" saith he, "go with your weapons, 
and bring ye the men perforce, and look not at 
the  land  nor  the  air,  and  put  your  garments 
round your noses and round your mouths, and 
breathe not the air of the land, and take not 
your  eyes  off  your  own  men"  ****  The  four 
went, and brought back with them perforce the 
***  other  two.  When  they  were  asked  what 
they  had  seen  in  the  land,  they  would  say: 
"Verily, we know not," say they; "but what we 
saw (others doing) we did."

Thereafter  they  came  rapidly  from  the 
island.

XVI
Thereafter  they  come  to  another  lofty 

island, wherein were four fences, which divided 
it into four parts. A fence of gold, first: another 
of  silver:  the  third  fence  of  brass:  and  the 
fourth of crystal. Kings in the fourth division, 



queens  in  a  another,  warriors  in  another, 
maidens in the other. A maiden went to meet 
them and brought them on land, and gave them 
food. They likened it to cheese; and whatever 
taster was pleasing to anyone he would find it 
therein. And she dealt (liquor) to them out of a 
little vessel, so that they, slept an intoxication 
of three days and three nights. All this time the 
maiden was tending them. When they awoke 
on the third day they were in their boat at sea. 
Nowhere  did  they  see  their  island  or  their 
maiden.

Then they rowed away.

XVII
Thereafter  they  found  another  island 

which  was  not  large.  Therein  was  a  fortress 
with  a  brazen  door  and  brazen  fastenings 
thereon. A bridge of glass (rose) by the portal. 
When they used to go up on the bridge they 
would  fall  down  backwards.  With  that  they 
espy  a  woman coming out  from the  fortress, 
with a pail in her hand. Out of the lower part of 
the bridge she lifts a slab of glass, and she filled 
the  pail  out  of  the  fountain  which  flowed 
beneath  the  bridge,  and  went  again  into  the 
fortress.

"A  housekeeper  comes  for  Mael  Duin!" 
saith German. "Mael Duin indeed," saith she, 
closing the door behind her.

After  this  they were  striking the brazen 
fastenings and the brazen net that was before 



them, and then the sound which they made was 
a sweet and soothing music, which sent them 
to sleep till the morrow morning.

When  they  awoke  they  saw  the  same 
woman (coming)  out of the fortress, with her 
pail in her hand and she fills (it) under the same 
slab.

"But a housekeeper comes to meet Mael 
Duin!" saith German.

"Marvelously  valuable  do  I  deem  Mael 
Duin!"  saith she,  shutting the enclosure after 
her.

The same melody lays them low then till 
the morrow. Three days and three nights were 
they in that wise. On the fourth day thereafter 
the  woman  went  to  them.  Beautiful,  verily, 
came she there. She wore a white mantle, with 
a circlet of gold round her hair. Golden hair she 
had. Two sandals of silver on her rosy feet. A 
brooch  of  silver  with  studs  of  gold  in  her 
mantle,  and  a  filmy,  silken  smock  next  her 
white skin.

"My  welcome  to  thee,  O  Mael  Duin!" 
saith  she;  and  she  named  each  man  (of  the 
crew) apart, by his own name. "It is long since 
your  coming  here  hath  been  known  and 
understood."

Then  she  takes  (them)  with  her  into  a 
great house that stood near the sea, and hauls 
up their boat on shore. Then they saw before 
them  in  the  house  a  couch  for  Mael  Duin 
alone,  and  a  couch  for  every  three  of  his 



people. She brought them in one pannier food 
like unto cheese or táth. Sheer gave a share to 
every three. Every savour that each desired this 
he would find therein. There she tended Mael 
Duin apart.  And she filled her pail  under the 
same slab, and dealt liquor to them. A turn for 
every three she had. Then she knew when they 
had enough. She rested from dealing to them.

"A fitting  wife  for  Mael  Duin were  this 
woman," saith every man of his people.

Then she went away from them, with her 
one vessel and with her pail.

Said his  people  to Mael  Duin:  "shall  we 
say  to  her,  would  she,  perchance,  sleep  with 
thee?"

"How would  it  hurt  you,"  saith  he,  "to 
speak to her?" She comes on the morrow. They 
said to her: "Wilt thou shew affection to Mael 
Duin,  and sleep with  him?  and why not  stay 
here tonight?" She said she knew no sin,  had 
never  known,  what  sin  was.  Then  she  went 
from them to her house; and on the morrow, at 
the same hour, comes with her attendance to 
them. And when they were drunken and sated, 
they say the same words to her.

"Tomorrow"  saith  she,  "an  answer 
concerning that will be given to you." Then she 
went  to  her  house,  and  they  sleep  on  their 
couches. When they awoke they were in their 
boat on a crag and they saw not the island, nor 
the fortress, nor the lady, nor the place wherein 
they had been.



XVIII
As they went from that place they heard 

in  the  north-east  a  great  cry  and chant  as  it 
were a singing of psalms.  That night and the 
next day till none they were rowing that they 
might know what cry or what chant they heard. 
They behold a high, mountainous island, full of 
birds,  black  and  dun  and  speckled,  shouting 
and speaking loudly.

They rowed a little from that island, and 
found an island which was not large. Therein 
were many trees and on them many birds. And 
after that they saw in the island a man whose 
clothing was his hair. So they asked him who 
he was, and whence his kindred. "Of the men 
of  Ireland  am  I,"  saith  he.  "I  went  on  my 
pilgrimage  in  a  small:  boat,  and  when  I  had 
gone a little from land my boat split under me." 
"I  went  again  to  land,"  saith  he,  "and  I  put 
under my feet sod from my country, and on it I 
get me up to sea and the Lord established that 
sod for me in this place," saith he, "and God 
addeth a  foot  to  its  breadth every  year  from 
that  to  this,  and  a  tree  every  year  to  grow 
therein. The birds which thou beholdest in the 
trees," saith he, "are the souls of my children 
and my kindred,  both women and men,  who 
are  yonder  awaiting  Doomsday.  Half  a  cake, 
and a slice of fish, and the liquor of the well 
God hath given me. That cometh to me daily," 
saith he, "by the ministry of angels. At the hour 



of none, moreover, another half-cake and slice 
of fish come to every man yonder and to every 
woman, and liquor of the well, as is enough for 
everyone."

When their three nights of guesting were 
complete; thy bade (the pilgrim)  farewell, and 
he said to them: "Ye shall all," saith he, "reach 
your country save one man."

XX
On  the  third  day  after  that  they  find 

another island, with a golden rampart around it 
and the midst of it white like down. They see 
therein a man, and this was his raiment the hair 
of  his  own body.  Then they asked him what 
sustenance he used. "Verily," saith he, "there is 
here a fountain in this island. On Friday and on 
Wednesday whey or water is yielded by it. On 
Sundays,  however,  and  on  feasts  of  martyrs 
good milk is yielded by it. But on the feasts of 
apostles, and of Mary and of John Baptist and 
also on the hightides (of the year), it is ale and 
wine  that  are  yielded  by  it."  At  none,  then, 
there came to every man of them half a cake 
and a piece of fish; and they drank their fill of 
the liquor which was yielded to them out of the 
fountain of the island. And it cast them into a 
heavy  sleep,  from that  hour  till  the  morrow. 
When they had passed three nights of guesting, 
the cleric  ordered,  them to go.  So then they 
went forth on their way, and afterwards bade 
him farewell.



XXI
Now when they had, been long avoyaging 

on the waves they saw far from them an island, 
and as they approached it, they heard the noise 
of the smiths smiting a mass (of iron)  on the 
anvil with sledges, like the smiting of three or; 
of four. Now when they had drawn near it they 
heard  one  man  asking  of  another:  "Are  they 
close at hand?" saith he. "Yea" saith the other. 
"Who," saith another man, "are these ye say are 
coining there?" "Little boys they seem in a little 
trough  yonder,"  saith  he.  When  Mael  Duin 
heard what the smiths said,  he saith:  "Let us 
retreat," saith he, "and let us not turn the boat, 
but let her sterns be foremost, so that they may 
not perceive that we are fleeing."

Then  they  rowed  away,  with  the  boat 
stern-foremost. Again the same man who was 
biding in the forge asked: "Are they now near 
the harbour?" saith he. "They are at rest," saith 
the watchman: "they come not here and they 
go not there."

Not long thereafter he asked again: "what 
are they doing now?" saith he. "I think," saith 
the look-out man, "that they are running away; 
me seems they are further from the port now 
than  they  were  some  time  ago."  Then  the 
smith  came  out  of  the  forge,  holding  in  the 
tongs a huge mass (of glowing iron), and he cast 
that mass after the boat into the sea;  and all 
the  sea  boiled;  but  he  did  not;  for  they  fled 
with  all  their  warriors'  might,  swiftly  hurried 



forth into the great ocean.

XXII
After that they voyaged till they entered a 

sea which resembled green glass. Such was its 
purity that the gravel and the sand of that sea 
were clearly visible through it; and they saw no 
monsters nor beasts therein among the crags, 
but  only  the pure gravel  and the green sand. 
For a long space of the day they were voyaging 
in that sea, and great was its splendour and its 
beauty.

They  afterwards  put  forth  into  another 
sea like a cloud and it seemed to them that it 
would not support them or the boat. Then they 
beheld under the sea down below them roofed 
strongholds and a beautiful country. And they 
see  a  beast  huge,  awful,  monstrous,  in  a  tree 
there, and a drove of herds and the tree, and 
flocks round about the tree and beside the tree 
an  armed  man,  with  shield  and  spear  and 
sword.  When he  beheld  yon huge beast  that 
abode in the tree he goeth thence in and flight. 
The beast stretched forth his neck out of the 
tree  and  sets  his  head  into  the  back  of  the 
largest ox of the herd and dragged it into the 
tree, and anon devours it in the twinkling of an 
eye. The flocks and the herdsmen flee away, at 
once. and when Mael Duin and his people saw 
that greater terror and fear seize them, for they 
supposed that they would never cross that sea 
without falling down through it,  by reason of 



its tenuity like mist.
So after much danger, they pass over it.

XXIV
Thereafter they found another island, and 

up around it rose the sea making vast cliffs (of 
water)  all  about  it.  As  the  people  of  that 
country perceived them, they set to screaming 
at them and saying: "Tis they! It is they!," till 
they were out of breath. Then Mael Duin and 
his men beheld many human beings, and great 
herds of cattle, and troops of horses and many 
flocks of sheep. Then there was a woman from 
below with large nuts which remained floating 
on  the  sea,  waves  above  by  them,  Much  of 
those nuts they gathered and took with them. 
(Then)  they  went  back  from  the  island  and 
thereat the screams ceased.

"Where are they now," saith the man who 
was after them at the scream. "They have gone 
away" saith another band, of them. "They are 
not so," saith another band.

Now it is  likely that there was someone 
concerning  whom  they  (the  islanders)  had  a 
prophecy that he would ruin their country and 
expel them from their land.

XXV
They got them to another island, wherein 

a strange thing was shewn to them, to wit,  a 
great stream rose up out of the strand of the 
island and went, like a rainbow, over the whole 



island, and descended into the other strand of 
the island on the other side thereof. And they 
were lying, under it (the stream) below without 
being wet. And they were piercing (with their 
spears)  the  stream  above;  and  (them)  great, 
enormous  salmon  were  tumbling  from above 
out of the stream down upon the soil  of  the 
island. And all the island was full of the stench 
(of the fish),  for there was no one who could 
finish  gathering  them  because  of  their 
abundance.

From  Sunday  eventide  to  Monday 
forenoon  that  stream  did  not  move,  but 
remained  at  rest  in  its  sea  round  about  the 
island.  Then  they  bring  into  one  place  the 
largest of the salmon, and they filled their boat 
with them, and went back from that island still 
on the ocean.

XXVI
Thereafter they voyaged till they found a 

great silvern column. It had four sides, and the 
width  of  each  of  these  sides  was  two  oar-
strokes  of  a  the  boat,  so  that  in  its  whole 
circumference there were eight oar-strokes of 
the  boat.  And  not  a  single  sod  of  earth  was 
about it, but (only)  the boundless ocean. And 
they  saw  not  how  its  base  was  below,  or 
because  of  its  height  how  its  summit  was 
above. Out of its summit came a silvern net far 
away  from  it;  and  the  boat  went  under  sail 
through a mesh of that net. And Diuran gave a 



blow of the edge of his spear over the mesh. 
"Destroy not the net,"  saith Mael  Duin,  "for 
what we see is the work of mighty men. For the 
praise of God's name," saith Diuran, "I do this, 
so that my tidings may be the more believed; 
and provided I reach Ireland (this piece of the 
mesh)  shall  be  offered by me on the altar  of 
Armagh." Two ounces and a half was its weight 
when measured (afterwards) in Armagh.

And  then  they  heard  a  voice  from  the 
summit of yonder pillar, mighty, and clear, and 
distinct.  But  they  knew  not  the  tongue  it 
spake, or the words it uttered.

XXVII
Then they see another island (standing) on 

a single pedestal, to wit, one foot supporting it. 
And they rowed round it to select way into it, 
and they found no way there into; but they saw 
down in the base of the pedestal, closed door 
under lock. They understood that that was the 
way by which the island was entered. And they 
saw a crowd on the top of the island; but they 
held  speech  with  no  one,  and  no  one  held 
speech with them. They (then)  go away back 
(to sea).

XXVIII
After that they came to a island, and there 

was a great plain therein, and on this a great 
tableland heatherless,  but  grassy  and smooth. 
They saw in that island near the sea, a fortress, 



large, high and strong and a great house therein 
adorned  and  with  good  couches.  Seventeen 
grown-up  girls  were  there  preparing  a  bath. 
And they (Mael Duin and his men) landed on 
that island and sat on a hillock before the fort. 
Mael Duin said this: "We are sure that yonder, 
bath is getting ready for us." Now at the hour 
of  none  they  beheld  a  rider  on  a  race-horse 
(coming)  to  the  fortress.  A  good,  adorned 
horse-cloth under  her  seat:  she wore a  hood, 
blue and she wore a  bordered purple mantle. 
Gloves with gold embroidery or, her hands; and 
on her feet, adorned sandals. As she alighted, a 
girl of the girls at once on the horse. Then she 
entered  the  fortress  and  went  into  the  bath. 
Then they saw that it was a woman that had 
al ighted  from  the  horse,  and  not  long 
afterwards came a girl of the girls unto them. 
"Welcome  is  your  arrival!"  saith  she.  "Come 
into the fort: the queen invites you." So they 
entered the fort and they all bathed. The queen 
sat on one side of the house, and her seventeen 
girls  about  her.  Mael  Duin.  sat  on the  other 
side, over against the queen, with his seventeen 
men  around  him.  Then  a  platter  with  good 
food thereon was brought to Mael Duin, and 
along with it a vessel of glass full of good liquor; 
and (there was) a platter for every three and a 
vessel for every three of his people. When they 
had  eaten  their  dinner  the  queen  said  this 
"How will the guests sleep?" saith she. "As thou 
shalt say," saith Mael Duin. "Your going from 



the island," saith she, "Let each of you take his 
woman, even her who is over against him, and 
let him go into the chamber behind her." For 
there were seventeen canopied chambers in the 
house  with  good  beds  set.  So  the  seventeen 
men  and  the  seventeen  grown-up  girls  slept 
together, and Mael Duin slept with the queen. 
After  this  they  slumbered  till  the  morrow 
morning.  Then  after  morning  they  arose  (to 
depart).  "Stay here," saith the queen, and age 
will  not fall  on you, but the age that ye have 
attained. And lasting, life ye shall have always 
and what came to you last night shall come to 
you every night without any labour. And be no 
longer awandering from island to island on the 
ocean!"

"Tell us," saith Mael Duin, "how thou art 
here."

"Not  hard  (to  say),  indeed,"  she  saith. 
"There  dwelt  a  good  man  in  this  island,  the 
king of the island. To him I bore yon seventeen 
girls, and I was their mother. Then their father 
died, and left no heir. So I took the kinship of. 
this island after him. Every day," she saith, "I 
go into the great plain there is in the island, to 
judge the folk and to decide (their disputes)."

"But why dost thou leave us today?" saith 
Mael Duin.

"Unless I go," she saith, "what happened 
to us  last  night  will  not  come to us  (again)." 
"Only stay," she saith, "in your house, and ye 
need not labour. I will go to judge the folk for 



sake of you."
So they abode in that island for the three 

months of winter; and it seemed to them that 
(those  months)  were  three  years.  "It  is  long 
were  here,"  saith  one  of  his  people  to  Mael 
Duin. "Why do we not fare to our country?" 
saith he.

"What you say  is  not  good,"  saith  Mael 
Duin "for we shall not find in our own country 
aught better than that which we find here."

(But) his people began to murmur greatly 
against Mael Duin, and they said this great is 
the love which Mael Duin hath for his woman. 
"Let him," then stay "with her if  he desires," 
saith the people. "We will go to our country."

"I  will  not  stay  after  you,"  saith  Mael 
Duin.

One  day,  then,  the  queen  went  to  the 
judging where into she used to go every day. 
When she had gone. they went on board their 
boat. Then she comes on her horse, and flings a 
clew after them, and Mael Duin catches it, and 
it clung to his hand. A thread of the clew was in 
her band, and she draws the boat unto her, by 
means of the thread, back to the harbour.

So then they stayed with her thrice three 
months. Then they came to (this) counsel. "Of 
this we are sure, now," saith his people, "that 
great  is  Mael  Duin's  love  for  his  woman. 
Therefore  he  attends  the  clew,  that  it  may 
cleave to his hand and that we may be brought 
back to the fortress." "Let some one else attend 



the clew," saith Mael Duin, "and, if it clings to 
his hand, let his hand be cut off."

So they  went  on board their  boat.  (The 
queen  came  and)  flung  the  clew  after  them. 
Another  man  in  the  boat  catches  it,  and  it 
clings to his hand. Diuran cuts off his hand, and 
it fell, with the clew, (into the sea). When she 
saw that, she at once began to wail and shriek, 
so  that  all  the  land  was  one  cry,  wail  and 
shrieking.

So in that wise they escaped from her, out 
of the island.

XXIX
They were for a very long while afterwards 

driven about on the waves, till  they found an 
island with trees upon it like willow or hazel. 
Thereon were marvelous fruits  thereon,  great 
berries. So of these then they stript a little tree, 
and then they cast lots to see who should prove 
the fruit that had been on the tree. (The lot) 
fell  to  Mael  Duin.  He squeezed some of  the 
berries into a vessel and drank (the juice), and 
it cast him into a deep sleep from that hour to 
the same hour on the morrow. And they knew 
not whether he was alive or dead, with the red 
foam  round  his  lips,  till  on  the  morrow  he 
awoke.

(Then)  he  said  to  them "Gather  ye  this 
fruit,  for  great  is  its  excellence."  So  they 
gathered (it), and they mingled. water with it, 
to moderate its power to intoxicate and send 



asleep. Then they gathered all there was of it 
and were squeezing it and filling (with its juice) 
all the vessels they had; and (then) they rowed 
away from that island.

XXX
Thereafter  they  land  on  another  large 

island.  One of  it  two sides  was  a  wood with 
yews and great oaks herein. The other side was 
a plain with a little lake in it. Great herds of 
sheep were therein. They beheld there a small 
church  and  a  fortress.  They  went  to  the 
church.  An  ancient  grey  cleric  was  in  the 
church,  and  his  hair  clothed  him altogether. 
Mael  Duin  asked  him:  "Whence  art  thou?" 
saith he.

"I am the fifteenth man of the community 
of  Brenainn  of  Birr .  We  went  on  our 
pilgrimage into the ocean and came into this 
island. They have all died save me alone." And 
then he shewed them Brenainn's tablet, which 
they the monks had taken with them on their 
pilgrimage.  The  all  prostrated  themselves  to 
the tablet, and Mael Duin gave it a kiss.

"Now," saith the ancient man, "eat your 
fill  of  the  sheep,  and  do  not  consume  more 
than sufficeth you."

So for a season they are fed there on the 
flesh of the fat sheep.

One day, then, as they were looking out 
from the island they see (what they take to be) 
a cloud coming towards them from the south-



west. After a while, as they were still looking, 
they perceived that it was a bird; for they saw 
the  pinions  waving.  Then  it  came  into  the 
island and alighted on a hill near the lake. Then 
they supposed it would carry them in its talons 
out to sea. Now it brought with it a branch of a 
great  tree.  Bigger than one of  the great  oaks 
(was) the branch and large twigs grew out of it, 
and a dense top was on it (covered) with fresh 
leaves. Heavy, abundant fruit it bore red berries 
like unto grapes only they were bigger. So (the 
wanderers) were in hiding, awatching what the 
bird  would.  do.  Because  of  its  weariness,  it 
remained for while at rest. (Then) it began to 
eat some of the fruit of the tree. So Mael Duin 
went till he was at the edge of the hill on which 
the bird was to see whether it would do him 
any evil,  and it did none. All  his people then 
went after him to that place.

"Let one of us go," saith Mael Duin "and 
gather some of the fruit of the branch which is 
before the bird."

So  one  of  them went  and  he  gathers  a 
portion of the berries and the bird blamed him 
not, and did not (even) look (at him) or make 
movement. They, the eighteen men, with their 
shields,  went behind it,  and it  did no evil  to 
them.

Now at the hour of none of the day they 
beheld two great castles in the south-west, in 
the place whence the great bird had come, an d 
they, swooped down in front of the great bird. 



When they had been for a long while at rest, 
they began to pick and strip off  the lice that 
infested the upper and, lower parts of the great 
bird's jaws, and its eyes and ears.

They  (the  two  eagles)  kept  at  this  till 
vespers. Then the three of them began to eat 
the berries and the fruit of the branch. From 
the  morrow  morning  till  midday,  they  were 
picking the same vermin out of all its body and 
plucking the old feathers out. of it and picking, 
out completely the old scales of the mange. At 
midday, however they stripped the berries from 
the  branch,  and  with  their  beaks  they  were 
breaking  them  against  the  stones  and  then 
casting  "them  into  the  sea  so  that  its  foam 
upon it became red. After that the great bird 
went  into  the  lake  and  remained  washing 
himself therein nearly. till the close of the day. 
After that he went out of the lake and settled 
on another lace in the same hill, lest, the lice 
which had been taken out of him should come 
(again).

On the morrow morning the (two)  birds 
with  their  bills  still  picked  and  sleeked  the 
plumage (of the third), as if it were done with a 
comb. The kept at this till midday. Then they 
rested a little, and then they went away to the 
quarter whence they had come.

Howbeit the great bird remained behind 
them preening himself and shaking his pinions 
till "the end of the third day. There at the hour 
of tierce on the third day he. soared and flew 



thrice round the island. and alighted for a little 
rest on the same hill. And afterwards he fared 
afar towards the quarter whence he had come. 
Swifter  and  stronger  (was)  his  flight  at  that 
time than (it  had been)  before.  Wherefore it 
was  manifest  to  them  all  that  this  was  his 
renewal from old age into youth, according to 
the word of the prophet, who saith "Thy youth 
shall be renewed like the eagle's."

Then  Diuran,  seeing,  that  great  marvel, 
said: "Let us go into the lake to renew ourselves 
where the bird has been renewed."

"Nay,"  saith  another,  "for  the  bird  hath 
left his venom therein."

"Thou sayest ill," saith Diuran, "I the first 
will go into it."

Then he went in and bathes himself there 
and plunged the lips into (the) water, and drank 
sups  thereof.  Passing  strong  were  his  eyes 
thereafter so long as he remained alive; and not 
a tooth of him fell  (from his jaw),  nor a hair 
from his head; and he never suffered weakness 
or infirmity from that time forth.

Thereafter  they  bade  farewell  to  their 
ancient man; and of the sheep they took with 
them provision. They set their boat on the sea, 
and then they seek the ocean.

XXXI
They  find  another  large  island,  with  a 

great  level  plain  therein.  A  great  multitude 
were  on  that  plain,  playing  and  laughing 



without  any cessation.  Lots  are  cast  by Mael 
Duin and his men to see unto whom it should 
fall to enter the island and explore it. The lot 
fell on the third of Mael Duin's foster-brothers. 
When he went he at once began to play and to 
laugh continually along with the islanders as if 
he had been by them all his life. His comrades 
stayed for a long, long space expecting him, and 
he came not to them. So then they leave him.

XXXII
After that the sight another island, which 

was not large;  and a fiery rampart  was round 
about  it;  and  that  rampart  used  to  revolve 
round the island. There was an open doorway 
in the side of that rampart. Now, whenever the 
doorway  would  come  (in  its  revolution) 
opposite to them, they used to see (through it) 
the whole island, and all, that was therein, and 
all its indwellers, even human beings beautiful, 
abundant,  wearing  adorned  garments  and 
feasting with golden vessels in their hands. And 
the wanderers heard. their ale-music. And for a 
long  space  were  they  seeing  the  marvel  they 
beheld, and they deemed it delightful.

XXXIII
Not long after  they had gone from that 

island they see far off among the waves a shape 
(?) like a white bird. They turned the prow of 
the boat unto it  southward, to perceive what 
they beheld. So when they had drawn near it in 



rowing. they saw that it was a human being and 
that he was clothed only with the white hair of 
his body. He threw himself in prostrations on a 
broad rock.

When they had come to him, they entreat 
a  blessing from him, and ask him whence he 
had gone to yonder rock.

"From Torach,  verily,"  saith  he,  "I  have 
come here, and in Torach I was reared. Then it 
came to pass that I was cook therein; and I was 
an  evil  cook,  for  the  food  of  the  church 
wherein  I  was  dwelling  I  used  to  sell  for 
treasures  and  jewels  for  myself:  so  that  my 
house became full of counterpanes and pillows 
and of raiment, both linen and wool colour, and 
of  brazen  pails  and  of  small  brazen tellenna, 
and  of  brooches  of  silver  with  pins  of  gold. 
Insomuch  that  unto  my  house  there  was 
nothing wanting of all that is hoarded by man; 
both golden books and book-satchels adorned 
with brass and gold. And I used to dig under 
the  houses  of  the  church  and  carry  many 
treasures out of them."

"Great  then  was  my  pride  and  my 
haughtiness."

"Now one day I was told to dig a grave for 
the  corpse  of  a  peasant,  which  had  been 
brought into the island. As I was (working) at 
that  grave I  heard.  from below me the voice 
out of the ground under my feet: "But do not 
dig up that place!," saith the voice. "Do not put 
the corpse of the sinner on me a holy pious 



person!"
"(Be it)  between me and God, I will put 

(it)," say I, "in my excessive haughtiness."
"Even so," saith he. "If you put it on me," 

saith the holy man, "thou shalt perish on the 
third  day  hence,  and  thou  shalt  be  an 
inhabitant  of  hell  and  the  corpse  will  not 
remain here."

Said  I  to  the  ancient  man:  "What  good 
wilt thou bestow me if I shall not bury the man 
above you?"

"To abide in eternal life along with God," 
saith he.

"How," say I, "shall I know that?"
"That is neither hard nor for thee," saith 

he.  "The  grave  thou  art  digging  will  now 
become full of sand." "Thence, wilt not be able 
to but will be manifest to thee that thou art the 
man above me, (even) though thou buriest me." 
That  word  was  not  ended  when  the  grave 
became full of the sand. So thereafter I buried 
the corpse in another. Now at a certain time 
set a new boat with tanned hide on the sea. I 
went on board my boat, and I was glad. So I 
looked  around  me:  and  I  left  in  my  house 
nothing  from  small  to  great,  that  was  not 
brought by me, with my vats and wise lets and 
with my dishes while I was in that looking. at 
the  sea,  and  the  sea  was  calm  for  me  great 
winds" come upon me, and draw me into the 
main, so that I saw neither land nor soil. Here 
my boat became still, and thereafter it stirred 



not from one stead. As I looked round me on 
every side, I beheld on my right hand the man 
sitting upon the wave.  "Then" he said to me 
"Whither  goest  thou"  saith  he.  "Pleasant  to 
me,"  say  I,  "is  the  direction  in  which  I  am 
gazing  over  the  sea  now"  "It  would  not  be 
pleasant to thee, if thou keepest the band that 
surrounds thee." "What may this band be?" say 
I. Saith he to me: "so far as thy sight reaches 
over sea and up to the clouds is one, crowd of 
demons  all  around  thee,  because  of  thy 
covetousness  and  thy  pride  and  haughtiness, 
and  because  of  thy  theft  and  thin  other  evil 
deeds. Knowest thou," saith he, "why thy boat 
stops?" "Verily,  I  know not."  "Thy boat shall 
not go out of the place wherein it stand until 
thou do my will." "Mayhap I shall not endure 
it," say I. "Then thou wilt endure the pains of 
helplessness till you endure my will." He came 
towards me then, and lays his hand on me; and 
me duly promised to do his  will.  "Fling" said 
he, "into the sea all the wealth that thou hast in 
the boat." "It is a pity," say I, "that it should go 
to loss." "It shall in no wise go to loss. There 
will  be one whom thou wilt  profit." (Then)  I 
fling every thing into the sea, save a little cup. 
"Go now" saith he to me, "and forth the stead 
in which thy boat will pause stay therein." And 
then he gave me for provision a cup of whey-
water and seven cakes. "So I went," saith the 
ancient man,  "in the directions that  my boat 
and the wind carried me:  for  I  had platform 



oars  and  my  rudder.  As  I  was  there  then,  a 
tossing among, the waves, I am cast upon this 
rock, and then I doubted whether the boat had 
stopt, for I saw neither land nor soil here. And 
I remembered what had been said, namely, to 
sit in the sea where my boat should stop. So I 
stood up and saw a little crag, against which the 
wave beat.  Then I set my foot,  on that little 
crag,  and  my  boat  escapes  from me  and  the 
crag. I lifted me up, and the waves withdrew. 
Seven years am I here," saith he "(living) on the 
seven  cakes  and  on  the  cup  of  whey-water 
which was given me by the man who sent me 
from him. And I had no (provision) save only 
my  cup  of  whey-water.  This  still  remained 
there.  After  that  I  was  in  a  three days  fast," 
saith he. "Now after my three days, at the hour 
of none, an otter brought me a salmon out of 
the sea. I pondered in my mind that it was not 
possible for me to eat a raw salmon. I threw it 
again into the sea," saith he, "and I was fasting 
for another space of three days.  At the third 
none, then, I saw an otter bring the salmon to 
me  again  out  of  the  sea,  and  another  otter 
brought flaming firewood, and set it down, and 
blew with  his  breath,  so  that  the  fire  blazed 
thereout.  So  I  cooked  the  salmon,  and  for 
seven  other  years  I  lived  in  that  wise.  And 
every day," saith he, "a salmon used to come to 
me, with its fire, and the crag increaseth so that 
(now)  it is large. And on that day seven years 
my salmon is not given me: (so)  I remained I 



am (fasting) for another space of three days. At 
the third none of the three days there half  a 
cake of wheat, and a piece of fish were cast up. 
Then my cup of whey-water escapes from me 
and came to me a cup of the same size filled 
with good liquor which is on the crag here and 
it is full every day. And neither wind, nor wet, 
nor heat, nor cold affects me this place. Those 
are my narratives" saith the ancient man. Now 
when the. hour of none arrived, half a cake and 
a piece of fish come to each of them all, and in 
the cup which stood before the cleric on the 
rock  was,  found  their  fill  of  good  liquor. 
Thereafter said the ancient man to them "Ye 
will  all  reach your country,  and the man that 
slew thy father, O Mael Duin, you will find him 
in a fortress before you. And slay him not, but 
forgive him because God hath saved you from 
manifold  great  perils,  and  ye  too  are  men 
deserving of death." Then they bade farewell to 
the ancient man and went on their accustomed 
way.

XXXIV
Now  after  they  had  gone  thence  they 

come to  an  island  with  abundant  cattle,  and 
with oxen and kine and sheep. There were no 
houses nor forts  therein,  and so they eat the 
flesh  of  the  sheep.  Then  said  some  of  them 
seeing a large falcon there: "The falcon is like 
the falcons of Ireland!" "That is true indeed," 
say some of the others. "Watch it" saith Mael 



Duin, "and see how the bird will go from us." 
They  saw  that  it  flew  from  them  to  the 
southeast. So they rowed after the bird, in the 
direction  in  which  it  had  gone  from  them. 
They rowed that day till  vespers.  At nightfall 
they sight land like the land of Ireland. They 
row towards it. They find a small island and it 
was  from this  very  island  that  the  wind  had 
borne them into the ocean when the first went 
to sea.

Then they put their prow on shore,  and 
they went toward the fortress that was in the 
island,  and  they  were  listening,  and  the 
inhabitants of the fortress were then dining.

They  heard  some of  them saying:  "It  is 
well for us if we should not see Mael Duin."

"That  Mael  Duin  has  been  drowned," 
saith another man of them.

"Mayhap it is he who will wake you out of 
your sleep," saith another man.

"If  he should come now," saith another, 
"what should we do?"

"That  were  not  hard  (to  say)"  saith  the 
chief of the house: "great welcome to him if he 
should come, for he hath been for a long space 
in much tribulation."

Thereat  Mael  Duin  strikes  the  clapper 
against the door valve. "Who is there?," saith 
the doorkeeper.

"Mael  Duin  is  here,"  saith  he  himself. 
"Then open!" saith the chief, "welcome is thy 
coming."



So  they  entered  the  house,  and  great 
welcome is made to them, and new garments 
are  given  them.  Then  they,  declare  all  the 
marvels  which  God  had  revealed  to  them 
according to the word of the sacred poet who 
saith Haec  olim  meminisse  iuuabit.  Mael  Duin 
(then) went to his own district, and Diuran the 
Rhymer  took  the  five  half-ounces  (of  silver) 
which brought from the net, and laid them on 
the  altar  of  Armagh  in  triumph  and  in 
exultation  at  the  miracles  and  great  marvel 
which God had wrought  for  them.  And they 
declared  their  adventures  from beginning  to 
end,  and  all  the  dangers  and  perils  they  had 
found on sea and land. Now Aed the Fair, chief 
sage  of  Ireland,  arranged  this  story  as  it 
standeth here;  and he did (so),  for  delighting 
the mind and for the folks of Ireland after him.


