THE SAMHITA' 

.. 
PART i. 

' PRAPA'tHA.KA I. 

· FIRST DASATI. 

R1tH I. By Bki:tradwt1;i:t Rishi. Come, 0 Agni,* to thd 
banquet of him who celebrates thy praise, to forwatd the 

offering. Heraldt (of the gods), sit down on the sacred grass. 
• 2. Thou, 0 Agni, hast been solemnly ordained by the 

gods to be inviter to all sacrifices performed in the world 

inhabited by men. ~ 
3. By M edhatithi. We invoke Agni, \the n\essenger 

·and herald of the gods. the possessor of all wealth,t that he 
inay prosperously conduct our present Racrilice. 

(Frnrn Rig Veda, 1 Adh, 22 Varga, 1 Rich.) 

4. By Bharadwrija. Agni has ever been the slaughterer 
'of our foes. He is the•possessor of wealth;§ he i~ celebrated 

In many 'various songs of praise ; he is the shining and res-
plende'nt divinity, the object of our invocatory hymns. 

5. By Usanri. 0 Agni, l praise thee our beloved 
guest,11 dear to me as a friend; like a chariot (for celerity), 
and worthy of being considered the source of wisdom,1 

6. By Purumitlhn. 0 Agni, save thou us, by thy 
mighty aids, _from ever/ fot>, and fr:rn1 every man that hates 
us.** 

• Agni is the god of fire, 
t Ho1a, the originat word, means 'inviter or CAiler to the sacrifice.' 
i Or knowledge. 
§ Or de,irer of sacrifice. ii Or go~t 10 sac, ilices, 
,1 O, weahh, 0 Or, lit1r11il)', 1id us of every foe, &c, 




PRAl'A1THJIKA, ·( •. 

1. By BltaradwJja. 0 Agni, whether I now sp·eak wi'tii · 
true intonations or with false, I mean to praise thee. Come' 
hither, therefore, and grow great by drinking this moon.: 
plant juice. 

8. By Vatsa. 0 Agni, '.I Vatsa, captivating thy mind, 
desire, by my song of prais; thy presence ; fb·etefore do 
thou come to me, even from the highest heavens. 

9. By Blta(f1d71laja. 0 Agni, , the R:ishi Atharvan 
churned thee, in the beginning, froM the lofty firmament, 
for the benefit of every offerer of sacrifice. 

tt>. By Vamadeva. a Agni, destroyer of darkness, 
come to us for our effectual preservation, and to g~ant us an 
audi~nce ; for thou art a divine personage. 

• • SECOND DASATI. 

1. By Ahi. 0 divine Agni, these men praise thee, that 
they may obtain strength. Destroy their foes, together with-
their diseases. 

2. By Vamadeva. I propitiate you* by my praises, 
who are the messenger of the gods, the possessor of all 
wealth, the presenter of the offering, the immortal, the great 
performer of sacrifi.ce. 

3. In thy immediate presence are ranged thy s4crificP.• 
defouring, wealth-bestowing, offering-produced, everywhere-· 
going sisters. t 

4 Hy .Madhuchhnnda. 0 Agni, dispeller of darkness, 
d,1y hy day do we approach thee with enlightened minds, 
making our prostrations. 

(Ser Hi~ V. t Adh. t V. r I!.) 

5. Rv Sttn 1h,cphn, when ordered to praise Rudra. 
0 (Agni), acqu.,intt',I with the method of offeri'ng up praise,t 

• 'fhe text has here the plural for the sin~ular, which in this place f 
have lollowed. 

t Flames. t Or who by pra:i.es invites tl\e god's, 




thou knowest* that kind of praise. which procures the favour ·. 
of Rudra, who carries on to perfection every sacrifice per-
formed in the abodes of men. '' · 

(Rig V 2 Adh, 24 V. •e>J ., 
6. By Medk4tithi. Tho~ ,rt invited to the excellent 

sacrifice, to drink the moon,-plant juice ; therefore, 0 Agni, 
come attended by the Maruts,f 

{Rtg V, 1 Adh, 36 V, 1 R,) 

7. By Sunahsepaa.. I desire to worshfp thee, with reli-
gious rites, who art like a war-horse and blazest over the 
sacrifices. i, ,1 · 

(Rig V. 2 Adh. 22 V. 1 R.) 

, 8. As Aurva and Bhrigu called on him, so do I call on 
• 

the pure Agni, who resides in the ocean.§ 
9. Let the man who lights up Agni perfo"i the cere-

monyll with an attentive mind. I am the man wlto lights up 
Agni with darkness-dispelling offerings. 

10. By Vatsa. Now men gaze at the surpassing radi-
ance, which in the days of old was united to the waters, and 
now shines forth in the firmament. , 

THIRD DASA TI. 

1. • I long for thee, Agni, who growest super.eminently 
great amid sacrifices, that thou mayer;t strengthen to.ur 
children. 

2. By Bharadwaja. Agni, by his fierce irradiations, 
restrains every cannibal foe. Agni gives us wealth equal to 
our desires. 

• Or do thou perform, t i, ,. the wind■, 
t This and the three preceding verses will be round in the specified 

.places of the Rig Veda, Var11111111t11m, here rendered war, is there in• 
terprcted lo11g•t11il1l; bpuse,.says the lcoinmentator, ha drives away 
our roes, as a long•tailed holac drives away the flies, 

t · o, tllo firmament, U 0, rain instruc&ion, 




4 . PRAPA'THAKA f. 

3. By Vamadeva. 0 Agni, thou art great, and in motion 
all around ; confer happiness on t~p people who desire to,. 
perform sacrifices to the gods. And come thou, and take thy 
seat on the sacred lrass.* ' 

4. By Vasishtha. 0 aivine Agni, preserve us from sin, 
and also from murder ; and consume by thy burning flames 
every one who c~lebrates not thy praise. 

i., ,, • 

5. By Bhar.ai:l;w/1ja. 0 divine Agni, yoke thy horses, 
those excellent horses, that ~peedily convey thy chariot, and 
are manifested in all directions. 

6. By V1m;htha. 0 Agni, lord of the "'.9rld, and the 
subject of our invocations. having laid hold of thee all-res-
plendent, and super-eminently,heroic, we place thee (in thy 
sacred recess.) 

7. B~ Virupa. Agni, as·the head of the heavenly hosts, 
stands pre-eminent, like the hump on a bull's neck. He, too, 
is lord of the earth, and refreshes us with the waters of the 
sky. 

8. By Sunahsepha. Do thou, 0 Agni, mention among 
the gods this our gift, and repeat to them this our l111mortal 
hymn of praise. 

(Rig V. 2 Adh, 22 V. 4 R .• ) 

9. By Gopavana. 0 Agni, maintainer of our bodily heat, 
tj Rishi Gopavana first brought thee forth by his songs. Do 
thou, our purifier, listen to our invocations. 

10. By Vamadeva. The lord of provisions, the wise 
Agni, forwards the offerings to the gods, and confers ricb 
rewards on the sacrificer. 

11. By Kanwa. The vivifying rays draw forth, into .the 
view of all, the divine Sun, the parentt of wealth. 

• The original is Varhi, and is the same as the famous Dharbha or 
Kus'a grass used at sacrifices, being spread on the floor inttead of a mat, 
for the attendant Brahmanas to sit ort. · , . 

t Or parent of wisdom, 




· DAs'irr ·rv. s 
u. · By lledA4tit,,i. Praise Agni the wi~e; .the divine, 

whose actions are guide.d lzy equity, who bestows gifts in lieu 
of sacrifice, and who is the destroyer of diseases. 

(Ri~ v. 1 A_dh. ?,3 v. 7 R:) . _ 
13-14. By Sind,,udwipa·11nd Am/Jariska. May the water-. 

goddesses become to us sources -of pleasure, in supplying us 
with water for ablutions,; and of pleasure, ·by supplying us 
with water fot drinking; a11d may they abandu11tly rain down 
happiness on' us. : : • · 

15. 0 lord of holy men, whose enlarged.mind dost thou 
now fill with:pleasure ?-his whose voice is empfoyed in prais-
ing thee during this moon-plant sacrific~. 

FOURTH DASATI, 

1. By Bkaradwaja. We extol in every sacrifice, and in 
every song of praise, you, the powerful Agni, the immortal, 
the 'parent of wealth, and who is dear to us as a friend. 

2. By Bkarga. Save us, 0 Agni, by the first ;* save us 
by the second ;t save us, 0 lord of provisions, by the songs 
of the tl\ree ; save us, 0 possessor of wealth, by those of the 
four (Vedas). ' 

3. By Trinpani-. 0 Agni, the source of manifold irra-
diations; 0 divinity encircled with unsullied splendour, 1-5 
thou manifestedst thy glory in BharadwAja Rishi, so, 0 
possessor of riches, our purifier, ever-young, do thou irra-
diate me. 

4. By Vasiskt,,a. 0 Agni, who assumest the form of 
the sacred oblation, let the wise men be dear to thee, who 
invoke thee, and come laden with sacriffcial goods, and 
divide among themselves the vast herds of cowst1given by 
the host at sacrifices.§ 

• The Rig Veda, . t The Yajur Veda, 
f Twelve hundred are reckoned in the Bhashya the portion · ol one 

Brahman, § These words are a paraphfaae of jan4n4m, 




6 PRAPA1THAl!tA I, 

5. By .Bharadwt11a, 0 divine Ag~i, thou art the utterer 
of our praise, the sovereign of men, fier,r in thy disposition, 
and ever watching the Rakshas. 0 lord of houses, thou art 
the mighty guardian of the heavens,, itnd lovest the abodes of 
men. 

6. By Praskanwa. 0 immortal Agni, origin of wealth, 
do thou, this morning, ~arry aloft thf variegated, darkness. 
dispelling treasures, for the benefit of the maker of the sacri. 
fice, to the gods, who rise at the early dawn. 

7. By Trinpani. 0 tholl mine of wealth, thou art poss-
essed of all var(pus glories : along with protection, confer on 
us riches. Thou, 0 Agni, art the forwarder to us of wealth ; 
do thou also remember to give us deep cisterns of water.for 
our sons. 

8. By Bharga. 0 Agni, thou art truly great in every 
place ; thou art the preserver, the faithful, the wise. 0 all. 
resplendent, all-bounteous ; the learned Brahmans ever take 
up their abode close by thee. 

9· By Bharga. 0 Agni, our purifier ·and our creator, 
liberally bestow on us, in reputable ways, food-increasing 
wealth, such as may make us honoµred, such as is desired by 
many and is attended with the highest f¥l}e, 

10. By Saubhari, The inviter of the gods, pr~ed by 
all men, confers all the ~ealth any one possesses. The 
prin~ipal dishes of sweet liquid (moon-plant juice) are re. 
served for Agni ; and let these eucharistic songs also be 
dedicated to the same divinity, 

FIFTH _DASATI. 

I. By Vasishtha. I invite, by this act of worship, Agni, 
the grandson of food,* the beloved, the omniscient who 
repairs to (the sacrificial hall), the conductor of sacrifices to a 

• The geneolo,y is thua reckoned in lho Bbashya. Food mues Iha 
Brahman, and he the aacred lire, 




bAS.ATi v. 1 
tottunate isStie; the herald appbinted for th; benefit 0£ ali the 
im rnortals. . · 

2. By Bh11rg11. Men cause thee to blaze forth for the 
benefit of their de~e~cJants, · and to obtain thosli primeval 
waters from which the world has sprung. Thou, full of 
activity, beatest away the .offering and the accompanying 
praises, and shinest al!)ong the gods. 

3. By Saubkari. lie, in whose hands1 the gods have 
placed all Racred rites, is eminently skilled in discer_!ling t~e 
justness -of sacred music ; therefote let oue voices spread 
abroad thP. praises of Agni, who has been produced in propi-
tious circumstances, and exalts the institutot of sacrificial 

rites. 
, 4. By Manli. During the sacred recitations, and while , 

offering the oblations, I supplira:te, in laudatory 'Verses, tO' 
obtain special protection, Agni1 the high-priest, the lifter UP' 
of the pestal1 who sits on the sacred grass; an·d also the 
Maruts Brahmanaspati, and the other gods. 

5. By Purumidha. (0 my soul), do thou, in songs of 
praise, extol Ag~i, whose head is surrounded with glory,* 
that he may protect thee. 0 Purumidha, for the attaining 
of wealth and the" procu~ing_.,,of excellent gifts for your 
family; extol the famous Agni, who assumes the hu·m·an form. 

fi. Hear, 0 open-eared Agni, and ye sacrifice-receiving' 
divinities that accompany him. Let Mitra a:nd Aryama; 
along with all the gods who cor/re to our morntni cere-
monies, 'sit down on the sacred grass during the sacrifice. 

7. By Saubhari. The divine Agni, brought down by 
Divodha, employs himself about mother Earth, with hiS' 
mighty energy1 after the manner of Indra,f and afterwards-
proceeds to the celestial mansions. 

• O'r whose 11lory reside5 within, ~s digester and purifi'er. 
t Either in edi,ci•ng the grain by hishea1 or caming 1h1 rain to falt 

by means of U!!ht11ing, 




8. By MedhJtilhi. Q ,p<1sfiessor ci all rneriJ, do tttoll 
tome from the earth, or from t~e lofty shining hl!ll,velis, and 
bbtaining increase in thy bodily pto~ortions, by ~¥ ~o~gs; 
satisfy the desires of our children. 

9. By Viskw4mitra. 0 Agni, wllen Worshipped, thou 
tomes! to the sacred wood rnd the maternal w&tera, nor 
tlost thou suffer dissolution when thou ,disappearest to us, for 
thou art still present with us. 

10. By Pr11skanwa. 0 Agni, Kanwa Manu ._first esta-
blished thee, th, possessor of radiance (in a sacred recess 
as an object, of worship,) to men for ever; then didst thour 
oblation-born, all-expan~ive, whom men wor~hip, _display thy 
radiance. 

SIXT!-! DASATh 

1. By Vasfshtka. The divine Agni, the tdnferrer of 
wealth, longs for your well-filled laddies ; therefore pour' 
them out ( on the sacred fire) after y~u have filled them, 
in order that the gdd may prosper you. 

2. By Kanwa. Let Brahmanaspati• · come, let the 
sweet-voiced goddess come, to obtain hero-producing1 
inan-preserving sacrifice in which the perltoneunit is 
offered; and let the gods bear away for themselves out 
sacrifice. 

3. By Kanwa. Stand up on high for our protection, 
like ~he divine Sun, (stand) on high to grant us food, when 
\ve call in sublime hylilns and by our oblation-presenting 
priests, 

4. By Saub!tari,. 0 possessor of riches, the man, whd1 
to obtain wealth, takes thee from the sacred household recess 
to place thee in the sacrificial recess, and gives thee offerings, 
he, 0 Agni1 receives an heroic son1 an adept in sacred song, 
and the supporter of lhousands. • 

• ,. ,. Ai:ni1 as lord of food i the goddess afterward~ m~ntioned is 
his wife, t Relative to the word • peritoneum! see tbe i11tt,1d11e1ion, 




bAS'Att VU. I} 

5. By Ka1,1wa. We pray to thee, the lord paramount 
, of the multitudes whoKe plinds are intent on the perfor-
ma.nc:e of sacrifice. (We prl!,ise,) in la11datory ·hymns, that 
Agni whom our friends cause to shine forth (in all his 
splendour). , 

6. By 1'rayukil. This Agni has the conferring: of vital 
power; he has the co,iferring of happiness, producing 
wealth, and of renowned descendants, and the herds of 
cows : he, too, has power to grant the destruction of 
our foes. 

7. In our sacrifice thou are the householder, thou art the. 
invoker of the gods, thou art the preparer of the oblation ; 
thou art praised by all, and art possessed of inscrutable 
wisdom ; thou Sl"rvest the gods, and thou askest riches, to 
confer favours on us. 

8. By Vis'wt!mitra. We, the men who are thy friends, 
beg of thee, all-resplendent, to grant us aid,-of thee, the 
grandson of the watery clement,* possessed of all valuable 
kinds of riches, the performer of illustrious actions, the extir-
pator of our enemies, and void of wrath.t 

SEVENTH DAS'ATI. 

r. By Va111,1di!oa. Do ye serve with oblations, purity, 
and place with hymns of praise, in his rece~s at the altar of 
offering, the herald o( the gods, and the sacnlids household 
lord. Serve that Agni, who receives the offerings, and •~ 
worshipped by sacrifice; (serve) also the household gods, 

2. By Upastu/11. Truly wonderful is the method of 
acting eKhibited by the recipient of praise, the ever-young; 
for he goes not to his mother to be suckled, but as soon as 
the breastless (wood) has produced him, he instantly lay~ 

• Water nourishes wood, and fro111 wood Ii, e is churned out ; hence 
the rel11tionship according to the Bha,hya, 

t O, void of sin, 
2 




lo 

hold on the offering, and all at once arriving at manhood, 
performs his duty as messenger of ~he gods. . · 

1 

3- By Vrihadukta. (0 Agni,) cause thy first and prin.1 
cipal (lightning-produced) radiance, and tby second radianc 1 

(residing in the Sun), along with thy ~hird (earth-born) rad 

ance, to enter into their proper places III our sacred enclosur, 
Continue to be the all-resplendent, and the beloved of tb 
gnds; manifest thyself also in our sacrifice.* · 

4. By /(utsa. We forward this hymn of praise to thee, 
who art worthy of all worship, the parent of riche!l', with a 
mind as much on the alert as that of the charioteer who urge, 
on his chariot. For, 0 Agni, thou art present in this our 
assembly, as the bestower of good things, and of a heart in-
clined to sing thy praise. May we never be guilty of extin-
guishing thee, 

5. By Bkaradwtija. To be a head for themselves, the 
gods produced Agni, the indefatigable traveller from earth to 
heaven, who resides in all mankind, is brought forth in , 
sacrifices, is the all-wise, the all-resplendent, the guest of the 
gr ds, our lord. 

6. By Bharadwaja. 0 Agni, the divine Bral1ma1,1s obtain 
(wealth) from thee by their songs, as the winds (obtain) water 
from the ridg('s of the clouds. 0 recipient of praise, with 
our eucharistic voices do we come eagerly to thee, as wa{• 
l10r~e·s rushing into the field of battle. 

7. By Vamadeva. Secure the approbation of your ow11 
Agni, the lord of sacrifices,t the causer of grief,t the inviter 
ol the gods, the faithful offerer ol sacrifice for the two 
worlds, who existed before the clouds, yet without vitality, 
and who shines with golden radiance. 

8. By Vasishtha. The radiant lord shines when praised; 
and his mouth, the receptacle of the offerings of clarified 
buttl'r, is celebrated by the oblation-presenting sacrificers. 

• Or in the excellent trees that p,oduce thee, 
t Or who bl.,zes over the s.icnfico. t The original word i1 R11dra, 




DAS' A TI VIII✓ II 

s is that· Agni who-'manifests his splendour at the natal 

e of the coruscations of the morning dawn. 
), By• Tris'iras: Agni traverses, by his own mighty 
·er, the two worlds, and when he sends down rain he 

ises his mighty roarings to extend from the farthest to the 
lrest extremity of heaven ; and, great in might, he grows 
Jater still in the (ethereal) abode of waters. 
r ro By Vas'ishtlttz. 0 fellow-priests, bring forth br 
,ur manual labour from the sacred wood (Arai,i) the every-
1ere-diffused Agni, who is borne on the priests' hands (to 
; recess), who appears from afar, who is the protector of 

le sacrificer's family, and comes to his solemnities. 

• EIGHTH D.\SAT!. 
r. By Budhagarislzti. Agni is possessed of all wi,dom, 

11] comes with his brilliance to the sacrificers, like a milch-
,w in the morning ; and then his irradiations proceed aloft 
the heavens, like the flocks of moving birds. 
2. By Vatsaprfya. The Br;\hmal).S lay hold on the 

ghty Agni, who subdues the earth, who is seized by the 
iests' fingers, who though in the company of fools is un-
nted by folly, the destroyer of the enemies' cities, and 
Jdtred propitious by praises, who is possPssed of a most 
cellent understanding, ha, green mustachins, and a habi-
.ion of his own, and is worshipped with valuable produc-
1ns. 

3. By Blzaradwaja. Thou, 0 Agni, like lhe Sun, hast 
e lustre, which is white, and another which is red ; thou 

manifested in the two forms of ,day and night, and art 
landed like. the canopy of heaven. 0 possessor of food, 
1u preservest the understandi,1gs of all men. 0 nourishing 
n, grant that we may receive prosperity-causing presents 
this sacrifice.* 

' Or let the offering by which thou prosperest be here pre~enl, 




JZ PRAPA'tHAKA r. 

4. By Vis'wtimitra. 0 Agni, grant to us, the performers 
of sacrifice, those supplies, by which many sacred rites can 
be performed, and cows which remain always profitable. 
0 Agni, may we have sons and grandsons, the fathers oi a 
numerous race, and may thy favourable regard·s be ever 
towards us. 

5. By Vatsapriya. The ~erald of the gods, who is 
born in all the vigour of manhood, and who knows the 
beavtl'ls, goes to the dwellings of men, and also to the regions 
of the waters; he gives us riches, he lays hold of the moon. 
plants and other sacrificial viands, is the destroyer (of dark-
ness), the possessor of wealth, and the protector of the body. 

6. By Vas'ishtl1a. Agni delights in the priest of ex-
cellent qualities, who sings the praise of the shiling, life. 
giving, illustrious god, who is possessed oi a most merciful 
disposition towards man, and worthy of all praise, whose acts 
are like those of the mighty lndra. 

7. By Vis'wdmitra. Agni, the producer of wealth, who', 
1s enclosed in the sacred wood, like a growing fcctus in a' 
pregnant woman, is daily praised by watchful attendant 
priests. 

8. By S'aya. 0 Agni, thou slewest the ancient YAtu. 
dhAna giants, and the R.\ksbas/1.s cannot conquer thee. De 
thou slay the malicious fools that rise against us; but the 
eaters of flesh are not to be liberated by thee,-they are re, 
served to be slain by the gods.* 

• The jlesk•taters may, a~cording 10 my Bral11nanical 1usistan1. •ithe1 
be interpreted as meaning notoriou• sinnprs, such as R,va11a, who aro 
reserved lor the special vengeance of the gods ; or holy 8, Ah man,, wh< 
are nnt to be called away from the world by hiforior min1stet1, but bi 
the god's themselves. II the lor111er be the M119e, &,h-taters Mea111 
cannibals ; ii the latter, partakers of the s11CJifieial yiandt. 

--



DAS'ATI IX. 

NINTH DAS'ATI. 

1. By Garga. 0 Agni, to whose going no obstruction, 
can be made, bring us strength-imparting provisions, lead us 
into the way of acquiring wealth and abundant supplies. 

of food. 
2, By Vamadeva.. If a man lights up Agni,* and regu-

larly presents him offerings, he becomes prosperous, and wilr 
enjoy happiness in a heavenly mansion. 

3. By Bkaradwaja. Those large volumes of white ex-
panding smoke go up to the heavens ; and thou the purifier, 
when praised, shinest forth like the Sun, in all thy bright-

ness. 
4, By Bh.aradwt1.ja. Thou, 0 Agni, like a friend, 

conferrest fame, spreading wide as the world, on thy wor-
shippers. 0 beholder of all things, as thou suppliest them 
with nourishment, so do thou supply us. 

5. By Dwaita. Agni, beloved by many, praised by mor-
tals, in whose immortal fire all men cause the offering to blaze, 
is this morning our guest. 

6. By Vasuyava. 0 thou, possessed of all various trea-
sures, do thou greatly applaud the invocatory hymns addres-
sed to Agni ; for thee riches, thee provisions, ever attend, as 
the queen, the king. 

7. By Gopavana. By words, and hymns of praise, 
uttered with all my might, do I praise thee, Agni, tbe guest 
of every sacrificer, greatly beloved by the offerer of sacrificial 
viands, and who art present at the out-door sacrifice.t 

8. By Puru. Provide abundance of food for the res-
plendent god Agni, whom, regarding as a friend, mortals. 
place in the eastern receptacle, to celebrate his worship. 

• O, the ,11cred fire, 
t Duryam: the Bha,hya on which is yajnam ; griharlwari bhavam, 

Sacrifices at which multitudes attend are performed out ol doors, in a 
temporary shed or pavilion erected for the purpose, · 




14 PRAP,\'THAKA I. 
... 

9. By G.,pav,w,. We app.roach the foe-destroying, 
ancient, incarnate Agni, who shone fottli'l!iost' illustriously 
in the form of S'rutavana, the son of Ark$ha. 

10. Ry Vam,ulcva. Agni, who is produced by the most 
excellent of all rites, is in an especial manner present, along 
with the other gods, in that same rite. He, too, is the 
father or Kas'yapa, the all-faithful, the mother of the human 
race,* the supreme lawgiver,t the all-wise. 

TENTH DAS'ATI, 

r. By Vllmadcva. We take retuge in King Soma, 
Varui,1a, Agni, A'ditya, Vishl)u, Sarya, Brahm!, and Vrihaspati. 

2. By Vamadcva. Those men who conquer the earth 
ascend to the lo£ty mansions of the sky from this nether 
world ; even as the descendants of A-9giras went up to 
heaven. 

3. By Vamadcva. We light thee up, 0 Agni, that thou 
mayest confer on us great riches. Do thou therefore, 0 
rainer of blessings, applaud· our heaven-and-earth-produced, 
excellent, saciificial viands. 

4, By Gri'tsamada. What my soul utters, Agni lays to 
heart; he knows where sacrificial viands are served up. As 
the ring embraces the wheel, so does Agni all our eucharistic 
hymns. 

5. By Payu. 0 Agni, by thy splendour destroy on 
every side the destructive splendour of our foes, and break 
down the might and prowess of the giant race of YAtudhAna. 

6. By Praskaiiwa. 0. Agni, prepare here an excellent 
sacrifice for the Vasus, the Rudras, the A'.dityas, and for the 
other gods, descendants of Manu, the givers of rain. 

• As supplying them with rain, lor their nourishmcnl, 
t In the original it is, the Manu, 

-



PRAPNTflAl<A H. 

FlkST OAS'ATI. 

t. i!y lJirghataffta. 0 Agni, I offer to thee ri1atty 
oblations. I call on theeJ lord of sacrifices : I am thine, all 
all in the house of a great man is his. 

2, tly Vis'wdmitra. Do ye satisfy the wise Agni, the ., 
herald of the gods, and holder up of light for the desttuc• 
tion of darkness, as of old, with many ~ongs of praise, 

3, By Gautama. 0 Agni, thou art lord of food and 
cows, and the offspring of Strength.* 0 thou parent of 
wealth, bestow on us stores of provisions.t 

4. By Vis'wamitra. 0 Agni, do thou, for the benefit 0£ 
those who desire the divine favour, offer the oblation to the 
gods in this solemn sacrifice ; for thou att conspicuous as the 
offerer of oblations, the inviter to the sacred rites, the re• 
cipient of praise, and the destroyer of murderous fiends. 

5. By Trita. The seven motherst entreat the wisdom 
of the sacrificers, for the prosperity of Agni1 who is immove• 
able, and knows the place of riches. 

6. By Trimati, May "e rest daily under the influence 
of Agni's blessing, and may the wise Aditi§ come to our 
protection; :may she, the bestower of bliss, confer on us 
happiness, and destroy the murderers of our children. 

7. By Vi/wamana.r. Praise the all-expanded sacrifice1 
to him who is the parent of wealth, distinguised by his 
wandering smoke, and pos~ssed of irresistible radiance, 

8. By Vis'wamanas. The enemy cannot prevail against 
the wisdom of the man who gives to Agni,-the man whd 
presents him with offerings, 

• The force used in chur11in11 the wood /\rani, 
t Or great lamt, 
f: i,t , TI1e se,en gods, seven offerings, or seven kinds of s•crifice, 
f Mother of the i. ods, 




tti ~RAPA1THAl<A II. 

9. By 'Ritiswa,ia. 0 Agni, lord of holy men, remove 
far from us that repulsive, tbievish, abominable foe, and 
make us the possessors of heaven. 

io. By f/is''lffmanas. 0 heroic Agni, lord of men, 
through the hearing of my new song of pr~1 burn up, 
with thy f-ervid heat1 the deceitfol Rfikshasfis, 

SKCOND UAS'ATI. 

1. By SiuMari. 0 ye who come to utter prab1es, laud 
Agni, the bountifol giver1 the bestower of water,* the mighty, 
who is encircled with shining radia~e. 

2. By Saubluri. 0 Agni, thou preservest thy friends 
by the production of food1 and they are saved by thy aids 
Qnd by heroic desc-endants. 

3. By Saubl;,a,-i.' (0 my ,soul}, praise him whom, like 
the Sun, the gods have appointed to be the giver of gifts, 
and the fteet messenger, who presents the offerings to the 
gods. 

4. By Saubkari. L.et not Agni, the possessor of wealth, 
the recipient of many praises, .the messenger and welcomtl 
inviter of the gods1 and the prosperer of the sacrifice, be 
angry with us or our guests. 

5. By Sauhh11ri. 0 possessor of all valuable things, 
\et Agni, appointed to be the inviter of the gods, be propi-
tious to 1.1s, and let our offering be prosperous, our splendid· 
sacriticial rites pro,perous, and our hy11Jns of praise pros-
pttous. 

6. :By Saubkttri. We pray to thee, the offerer of 
sacrifice1, the bestower of gifts) :the inviter of the gods, the 
immortal, that thou wouldest prosper this sacrifice. 

7. By Saubhari. Bring such food) 0 Agni, as shall, 
.in the sacrificial hall, subdue the cannibal RAkshasAs, and 
the rage of malicious men 

• Or accepter of sacrifice. 




~. By Vis'wamanas. Agni, the lord of rrt~n, the graceful, 
who is propitious to the descendant of a man, such as [ all'I, 
will surely, without fail, slay all the R~kshasas. 

[Here end tlte praises of Agni.] 

tHIRD DAS' ATh 

t. By Bizaradwaja. While the moon-plant sacrifice is 
In progress, do thou, 0 my stlul, in union with the other 
(chanters), sing the happiness of Indra, worshipped by multi. 
tudes, the bestower of ., with the eagerness with which 
the hw;bandman extols the happy condition of a power-
ful bull. 

2. By S rutakaksha. 0 I ndra, performer of a hundred 
sacrifices, most resplendent ( divinity), who rejoicest in the 
hymns of the celebrators of thy praise, do thou gladden 

them with a joy similar to thy own. 
3, By Harya(a. 0 my voice, do thou celebrate the 

cloud-shaped divinity, both whose ears are adorned with 
golden pendants ; and the earth which furnishes water for 
our sacrifice. 

4. By .Yrutakakslta. 0 sons of S1rutakaksha1 celebrate 
the praises of the gods, with all your soul, for the obtaining 
of horses ; with all your soul, for the obtaining of cows ; 
and with all your soul, to obtain a place in the heaven of 
Indra. 

5. By S'rufakakslta. We present sacred viands to tha~ 
Indra, who is the slaughterer of Vritra. May he, like a bull, 
become to us the rainer down of water.* 

6. By DevajJmja, 0 lndra, 5ender of rain, thou• over-
comest, by thy own internal strength, and by the aid of 
foreign powers, and by thy all-subduing patience : thou, too, 
art, the rainer down of blessings. 

• The Bhashya adds, "yatha Vrishabhah retasah varshit.11 tadvad 
varshita udak15ya Sa bhavatu," 

3 


18 
l'llAPA1THAKA II. 

7- Ry Goshtfkta and Sukti, Our sacrifice mRgn/Res 
Indra, wlio whirls round the earth,* and who causes thunder 

in the heavens. 
s. By 66slzukta and Sdklt'. 0 Jndra, as thou art lord 

of wealth, so may l become its sole monarch ; and may the 
chanter at my solemnities become the possessor oE herds 
of cows. 

g. By Medhatitki. 0 performers of the moon-plant 
sacrifice, do ye, with all your might, advance the praise of 
the joyful lndra, and the moon-plant sacrifice of the all-pros-
perous hero. 

10, By Medhlttitlri. 0 possessor of wealth, drink of 
this moon-plant juice, and eat to satisfaction of the sacrificial 
viands. 0 void of fear, we eat to please thee. 

FOURTH DAS' ATI, 

r. By Sukaksha.. 0 Sun,· thou presentest thyself to 
lndra, famed for his riches, the sender down of rain, the 
prosperer of the rites of men, the foe-destroyer. 

2. By 'iukaksha. 0 slayer of Vritra, thou art the for-
warder (to thy heavens) of whatever may be produced to-day 
(in our sacrifice); for, 0 lndra, all this world is under thy 
control. 

3. By Bhar11d11'1ija. That youthful lndra, who con-
ducted far and near, under his secure guidance, Turvas'a and 
Yadu, is our friend. 

4. By Sukaksha O lndra, thou, who art the leader and 
conductor of great expeditions, !Pt not our foes advance 
upon us, but grant that by thy aid we may gain the victory 
over them. 

5. By Madhuckhanda. 0 lndra, bring for our protection 
wealth worthy of our acceptance, such that by its means we 

• Or changes the fate ol 1he ground, 




DAS1ATI V. 19 

~ay completely conquer our foes, vrealth ever enduring ·and 
~ver increasing. 

6. By Madhuchhanda. ln every great battle, and in 
~very lesser conflict, we invoke the thunder-bolt-holding 

ndra to be our ally in contending with our foes. 

7. By Tris'oka. Indra drank the moon-plant juice of 
f Kadru (the wife of Kas'yapa, in the full assembly, and there 

do ye magnify the might of lndra. 

8. By Vas'isht/ia. 0 Indra, dispenser of rain, and 
possessor of wealth, we, the aspirants after thy favour, 

especially praise thee. Do thou acknowledge this our 

sacrifice. 

9. By Tris' oka. , Happy are) those who kindle up Ag11i, 
and at the same time spread the secred grass, and of 

whom Indra, ever-young, is the friend. 

lo. By Sas'oka. Cleave asunder all who hate us and 
oppress us, slay those who oppose us in war ; and, 0 

possessor of wealth, bring with thee the object of our desire. I 

FIFTH DAS'ATI. 

1. By Ka~1wa. Even here the smack of the whip 
'. they hold in their ha11ds is heard, as well as the noise of 

their variegate,! chariots as they rattle along. 

2. By Tris'oka. 0 lndra, drinker of the moon-plant 
juice, these thy friends (the attendant priests) look on thee, 

with the affection that the cattle-feeder looks on his cattle. 

3. By Vatsa. All the sacrificers employ themselves in 
appeasing Indra, and do homage to him as the rivers do 

to the sea. 

4. By Kusidina. We entreat the gods, the senders 

down of rain, to render us their all-powerful protection for 

our pre,ervation. 

5. By Medhatithi. 0 (lord of food) Brahma1_1aspati, 

do thou for me, the chanter at the moon-plant banquet, as 

thou didst for KakshM.n, the son of Us'ija. 



20 PRAPA'THAKA II. 

6. By Sukaksha. Let the slayer of Vritra convey know-
ledge to my mind ; and t1¥ possessor of many excellent 
qualities, the powerful lndra, hear me. 

7. By Sukaksha. 0 divine Savita,* provide for us abun-
dant wealth, along with a numerous progeny; and keep the 
causer of death's fatal dream far from us. 

8. By Pragdtha. Wherever he who is the sender of 
rain, ever-young, all-embracing, unsubdued, takes up his 
abode, there the officiating priest performs his service.t 

9. By Vatsa. In the region of the conglomerated 
clouds, and where the many waters meet, the wise lndra was 

produced by Intellect. 
10. By lrimiri. Do ye praise with your voices (lndra), 

king of men, who is worthy of all praise, the subduer of 
heroes, and the bestower of gifts. 

SIXTH DAS'ATI. 

1. By S' rutakaksha. I ndra, whose featurest have a 
divine gracefulness, has ever been in the habit of partaking 
of the strengthening sacrificial viands offered up by me, and 
of drinking the moon-plant juice, along with the barley-bree. 

2. By Medlidtithi. 0 possessor of immense riches, these 
our voices, ever uttering thy praises, delight thee, as the 
voices of the milch-cows delight the herd of calves. · 

3. By Gautama. Doubtless, at the going down of the 
Sun, the rays of light reverently bend themselves towards 
the upprr world, the region of the moon.§ 

4. By Bharadwdja. Wherever lndra, the dispenser of 
copious showers of rain, goes, he brings along with him 
abundance of water, and in doing so he is joined by (the 
Sun in the character of) Pus ha ( the nourisher). 

* The Sun, as the parent of nalural p, oductions, 
t Or even BrahmA, the Creator, serves thee, 
f The original means nose. 
§ The Bhf<shya. adds, '' and relu~n lo us in moonlight." 




DAS'ATI VII. .21 

5. By Yutadakshnd. The mother of the wealth. 
possessing, chariot-loving Mar1'5,* herself desirous of fame, 
and united to her sons, whom she brings forth from their 

residence, sends us down rain. 

6. By Sukaksha. Come, 0 lord oi the joy-inspiring 
juice, to our moon-plant banquet, along with thy horses 
named Harl. Come, with the horses Har!, to our moon. 

plant banquet. 
7. By Sukaksha. Prepare pleasant offerings, such as 

magnify lndra, at this sacrifice. Get ready also the defect. 

atoning offering,t with all your might. 

8. By Vatsa. I have embraced the wisdom derive~ 
from my truth-regarding father (Ka:t;1wa), and; like the Sun1 
I have become the beholder of all things. 

9. By S'una~s'eplia. Let .our praises, the procurers of 
wealth, and of stores of provisions, rest in the ever-joyful 

lndra ; for we desire by means of these to obtain renown. 

10. By Vamadeva. Soma and Pushi both know all the 
blissful abodes, and they are appointed to convey to the gods 

the offering of the sacrificer and his wife. 

SEVENTH DAS' ATI. 

,, By S'rutakaksha. Drink yet of the prepared moon-
. plant juice, and extol lndra the all-subduing,§ the performer 

of a hundred sacrifices,11 and the bestower of gifts on men. 

2. By Vas'ishtha. Celebrate, my friends, the juice that 
inspires delight',r into Indra, who drives the golden-coloured** 

horses, the drinker of the moon-plant juice. 

• Wonds. t i.e., !"he defects ol this sacrifice. 
t We have here vah, correspondin11 to the Latin 110s in the nomina• 

live plural, 

f Or All-~ustAining, 
II Hunilred alludes to the leiiend of the sacrifice of one hundred 

horses, by which the kingdom of heaven is obtained ; or it means many, 

11 Or intoxicating, maddening; in the original, madanam. 
" Or grcen-colourcJ I I -~- RA,•~,•.',Jt'>t..,,C.~ Ml!'Sito,il _ nt,-, 




22 PRAPA'TIIAKA JI. 

3. Ry Medhdtithi. We, the descendants of Kal).wa, 
thy friends, the performers'tf sacrifice, anxious to worship 
thee, celebrate thee, 0 Indra, in sacred hymns. 

4. By S'rutakaksha. Let our voices praise the moon• 
plant juice offered to the joyful Indra, and let our sacrificing 
priests worship the god Soma.* 

5. By frisni. 0 lndra, this moon-plant juice has been 
purified for thee, and placed on the sacrificial grass : come 
quickly, and drink of it. 

6. By Madhuchlzanda. We call on thee, the performer 
of meritorious acts, day by day, as men rail on the cow to 
the milking. 

7. By S'oka. 0 dispenser of rain, I am preparing moon-
plant juice for thee to drink in this moon-plant sacrifice. 
Partake of it, and enjoy the delight (it inspires). 

8. By Ku.1idina. 0 lndra, the moon-plant juice has 
been expressed for thee, in many spoons, and by many 
expressers. Drink of it, for thou art lord of all. 

g. By S'una~siJph11. 0 my friends, we call for protec-

tion, in every time of war,t on Indra, superior in might i on 
him we call in every engagemenq 

10. By Madhuchltanda. 0 my friends, offerers of 
praise, sit down without delay, and sing to the honour of . 

lndra. 

EIGHTH DAS'ATI. 

r. By Vis'wtimitra. 0 lord of wealth, worthy of all 
praise, drink of this moon-pl;nt juice, prepared by the might 
(inherent in the sacrificers) . 

. 2. By M11dhuchhanda. lndra is celebrated as mighty 
from the times of old, therefore let might be ascribed to 
us by the holder of the thunderbolt i for his strength is 
equal to the heavens in greatness. 

• The moon-plant, or its juice, personified. 
t Or in every offering. ! Or for ever~ benefit. 



UAS1A'f'l IX. 

J, 13y Kusidina. 0 lndra, having laid hold of the vessel 
with thy mighty right hand, drink our renowned sparkling 

moon-plant juice, truly worthy of thy acceptance. 
4. By PriyamMhas. I celebrate with my voice, as far 

as my knowledge permits, lndra. the lord of the moon-plant 
banquet, the son of truth,* the lord of holy men. 

5. By Vamadeva. Let him, who is possessed of mani-
fold excellences, who is always increasing, and our friend, 

be with us for our protection, by greatly forwarding the 

present sacrifice. 
6. By '>'rutakaksha. (0 my soul), thou approache~t, for 

thy protection, the ever-victorious lndra, extolled by the 

voices of all. 
7. By Medhdtithi. l beg wealth of Indra, the lord of 

the sacred assembly, the distinguished, the beloved, the 
graceful, who remains near (the sacrificer). 

8. By Vamad!va. Wherever, under the lofty heavens, 

thy goings may be, and in whatever paths like a fleet horse 
thou performcst thy movements, there let our earth-born 
praiseR reach thy ear. 

9. Hy Sukaksha. 0 lndra, performer of many meritori-
ous acts,t bring to us stores of rxcellent meat and drink; 
for it is by this means that thou conferrest happiness on us. 

10. By Putakaksha or Sukaksha. Here is placel!l the 
juice of pressed moon-plants; let the Maruts drink of it, and 
and let the twin sons of As'wini join in quaffing the royal 
beverage. 

[ End of the laudatory hymns addressed to various 
divinities. l 

Nl.',TH DAS'ATI. 

t. By Devaja. Our praises, moving towards Indra, go 
and reside in him, and beg of him superior might. 

• Or food. 

t literally, as before, "performer of a hundred sac, ifice~." 



l'RAPA'THAKA ii. 

2 By Godh11. 0 ye tods, we slaughter ho victim, w~ 
use no sacrificial stake, we Worship by the repeti'tion of 
sacred verses. 

3. By Vdmadeva. l am now comP., while the night is 
but departing O offerer of praise, sing loudly and welt 
0 thou, who walkest within the sacred enclosure, praise the 
(generative) god Sarita. 

4, By Praska(1Wa. The matchless, lovely dawn has but 
just come to take up her abode in the heavens. I praise 
you, twin sons of As'wini, with all my might. 

5., By Gotama. The invincible lndra slew ninety times 
hine of his foes with the bones obtained from the Rishi1 
badhkha's head * 

6. By Madhuchhanda. Come1 0 lndra, delight in our 
food, along with our preparations of moon-plant juice; for 
thou art the mighty one that excellest in strength. 

7. By Vdmaddva. 0 lndra, slayer of our enemies, 
come to our sacred enclosure O mighty god1 come with all, 
prevailing aids. 

8. By Vatsa. I-lis f\light, whereby he encircles heaven 
and earth, as the skin does the body, appears in all its 
splendour. 

9. By S'una~sepha. Thou approachest the sacrifice 
with the eagerness the male pigeon does his mate : let then 
these prayers of mine entet thine ear. 

10. By Ul!ovatayana. Let him come as our medicine, 
and the conferrer of happiness, and the inspirer of vigour 
into our breasts; and let him prolong our lives. 

Tl!'.NTH DAS1 A TI. 

I. By Kai1wa. The man whom Varul)a distinguishes 
for his knowled~e, and Mitra and AryamA protect, can never 
be slain by any one. 

• This Rishi is said to have given up his life, that the bones of his 
head might be used to destroy the Asura. KAlas'unja, 




~- By Vatsa. Influenced by the desire or cows, of 
1 horses, and of chariots, we praise thee as aforetime ; for 
thoa art worthy to be praised by all offerers of sacrifice. 

3. Viitsa. these hymns of praise (are being sung) for 
thee, where they prepare the clarit.ed b11tter and the mingled 
moon-plant juice. 

4. By Sak,,kska. In thi~ sacred con-procuring cere-
mony, 0 subduer of hosts, and recipient of the praise of 
'Crowds of worshippers, we adore thee; for thou art present 
in every moon-plant sacrifice. 

5. By Madhuckkanda. Let Saraswatf, who is 1 our 
purifier) and by the sacrificial viands the supporter of 
strength, and the protectress of sacred rites, set her affec-
tions on our sacrifice. 

6. By Vdmadtva. Who is there that will satisfy lndra 
with the rites termed Nahusha ?* I will join such a one in 
offering the m~on•plant juice to the god : at the, same time 
let I ndra heap wealth upon us. 

7. By lrimi. 0 lndra, come to the banquet of the. 
sweet-flavoured expressed moon-plant juice, which is here 
Set on the sacred grass in the miJst of the holy assembly. 

" 8. By S11tyadllriti. Let me have all the glorious lrre~is-
tible aids of the mighty trio, Mitra, AryamA, and Varu~a. 

9. By Vatsa. 0 lndra, p(~~se3~or of unbounded wealth, 
the subduer of foes, the lord of horses, may we ever continue 
to be the celebrators of the praise of such a one as thou art. 

l=>RAPA'THAKA III. 

FIRST DAS'ATI. 

1. By /Jrag4tlia. Let these mooh-plants fill thee with. 
delight, 0 holder of the thunderbolt ; do thou procure for 

• Otherwi~e called the J yolishtoma, 



PRAPA1THAKA Ill. 

us wealth, and at the same time kill outright all who hat!! 
the BrAhmai;is. 

2. By Vis'wamitra. 0 lndra, recipient of praise, 11ave 
us ; and since thou art a partaker of our streams of pleasant 
moon-plant juice1 and all our provisions are thy gift, (come 
to our solemnities). , 

3. By Vdmad!va (addrtssed to his sons and grandsons). 
Your lndra is the unceasing operative agent;* he is like a: 
constant attendant, a beneficent divinity, worthy of the 
election of all, ever victorious, the supreme ford. 

4. By S'rutakaksha. 0 lndra, let the moon-plant juice 
flow into thee, as the rivers flow into the sea, since there is 
no god that surpasses thee. 

5. By Madhuchltanda. The (Sima Veda) singers with 
loud songs celebrate Indra; the (Rig Veda) chantets by 
their sacred verses celebrate Indta ; and (the Yajur Veda 
priests celebrate) lndra with their voices. 

6. By Sukaksha. May Indra, along with food, give us 
the treasure of an illustrious and talented progeny ; and may 
he, the fleet divinity; confer upon us horses. 

7, By Gritsamada. lndra quickly dispels the greaf 
fear with which I am seiied ; for he is unchangealY!e,• and the 
observer of the actions of men. 

8. By Sanyu. 0 recipient of praise, our voices ever 
encircle thee in every moon-plant sacrifice, as milch-cows, 
do their calves. 

9. By Bharttdwajtt. 0 lndra, to obtain thy friendship' 
and our own ~omfort, we call on thee to colll'e quickly, along: 
with Push.I. , the Sun), for the reception of our sacrifi-
cial viands. 

10. By VJmadr!va. 0 Indra, there is, oo god thy 
superior, none more powerful than thou art; nor, indeed', 
0 slayer oi V1itra1, is there one that ca-n be put on1 a, !eve~ 
with thee. 

• i ,., ever causing stren11th, food, prosperity, gold, lonx life, 




DAS'ATI II, 

SECOND DAS' ATI, • 
1. By Virilpa. I heartily praise thee, the destroyer 

►f the men who hate us, and the unfailing procurer of food 
md cows. 1 

2. By Madhuchhanda. 0 Indra, let the praises, suited 
to please, which I have presented, reach thee, the sender 
jdown of rain, and lord of all. 

3. By Vatsa. It is the man of good morals, and who 
1s without malice, that the Maruts, Aryami and- Mitra 
protect. 

4. By Tris'oka. 0 Indra, wherever, whether in some 
strong chest or in some hill or :well,* treasure worthy of 
regard is laid up, thence do thou bring it to us. 

5, By Sukaksha. l come to thee, desiring thee to bes-
tow on me great wealth, thou renowned slayer of Vritra,. 
more powerful than any of the race of heroes. 

6. By V4madeva. 0 Indra, we come to thee with 
; stores of sacrificial viands prepared for thee. 0 brave . 

S'akra, in our most solemn sacrifice, we come with stores of 
viands for such a one as thou art. 

7. By Vis'wamitra. 0 lndra, this morning accept our 
sacrifice, accompanied with rice, curds,t sweet cakes,t and 
praises. 

8. 0 Indra, thou didst with the spray of water cut off 
the head of the Daitya Namuchi, when thou slewest the rest 
in the field of battle. 

9. By Vamadeva. 0 Indra, these moon-plants, worthy 
of being subjected to pressure, are pressed for thee. 0 
possessor of immense riches, do thou satisfy thyself with 
them. •4 

• When the English took Poonah, ten lakhs of rupees belonging to 
the P~shwi were found built into the side of a well, 

t The original means sour curds mixed with barley.flour. 
t Apu1'a, the original word, means a cake made of whcal O\' rice•; 

ffour, with b•ttcr, and sugar or molasses, 



10. By· Vdmarleva. 0 lndra,. possessed of• r.esptend'ent 
wealth, these pressed mocn-plants are placed for tl\ee on 
the regularly spread sacted grass : do t'bou confer happinesi 
,m the celebtatots ol. thy ptise. 

TMIRD DAS'!l.11. 

1,. By S'una~seph.a. We, thy worshippers,;it are anli.iou! 
to drench thee, lndra, the performer of a hundred sacrifices,. 
the lavish bestower of gifts, with our moon-plant juice, as 
men do tbe road to the we!Lt 

2. By S'1tutakaksh.a. 0. lnd.ra, come born, hea11en into 
our presence with. all thy speed, bringing food toMisting of 
viands of a thousand different kinds. 

3. By Tris'olla. The piercer of the clouds,J tb~ moment 
he was born, seizing an arrow, said to his mothe., Who, 
are the men of violence, and. wh0, the heroes that possess 
renown? 

5. By Medkatitk'f. We call on, thee, the much.eulogized. 
and long-armed lndra, for aid,-on thee, the slayer elf Vritra. 
for protection. 

5. By S'aunaka·. Let Varui:ia, and the sage Mitra,, and 
AryamA, with the othes gods, take delight in us, ~cl'lea.d us 
in the straight road. 

6. By Vrismatitki. The goddess Aurora, iu the furm, 
of 'the dawn, comes from the distant regions of the moon 
lo this nether world, and diffuses her splendour all a.round. 

7. By Vis''ll!amitra. 0 Mitra and Varw;ia, performers of 
meritorious acts, do ye, with showers, irrigate the pasture-
lands, and refresh with waters thA: two worlds. 

• Or desirous of lood. , 
t •Alkiding lo a custom, still prev,,Je,,t, ·CK~ -ftil)t-in·tlle 

mornh1g the road ID the well with cow-dung. water, 
i O, slayer of V ,ilra, The whole legend ol 'V rltr:iin1ra. seems' but an 

allegorical description of the forlred lightninA passing fto~Oh\ cloud~ 
111atlter, lll)d the ~tber com:0111i1ants of a thu111urstor01., 




DAS1ATr IV, 

8. By Nirat1)'astkupa. The sons (of Prish\li thdfaruts) 
send forth their voices and the showers from on high. at the. 
time of our sacrifice ; and desirous o.f our, oblations, they 
thus act with the greatest reaaess, that they may obtain a 
welcome r_eception. 

9. By Medhatitki. Vishi;i.u traversed the world, taking 
but three steps, and covered with his foot this tefrestdal 

world.* 

FOURTH DAS~,HI: 

i. By MMMtitJ,i. Come hither, 0 Indra, to me, th4, 
preparer. of the excellent moon.plant juice, with the ,readiness 
th-Ou goest to the other pressers of the plant : drink the 
moon,plant juice we offer thee, 

2. Vamadlva. Why is the praise of him who is of sur-
passing wisdom, and the mighty god, celehr<1ted by us, That 
it may be the means of increa.ing his glory. 

3. By Merihdtithi. The possessor of wealth will not 
listen to his praise sung by a man who speaks with an indis-
tinct voice, neither will he listen to a murmuring chant, but to 
hymns distinctly sung. 

4. By Vamadeva. Indra is greatly celebrated in our 
eucharistic hymns ; he is the giver of food, .the lord of provJ-
sions, the possessor of the horses named Harf, and t~e lover 
of _prepared moon-plant juice. 

5. By S'rutakakslta. Come into our presence .to ;partake 
of the-moon.plant juice and other viands. Do ,not get angry 
with us, (but bear with us,) as an elderly man ,does •with a 
young wife. 

6. By SumiJa~ 0 .possessor of wealth, when is it that 
praise offered ,to~bee, the lover of glory, is recei-ved -in .the 
manner that water ,is taken up by the water-eo1me ? It -iii 

• There is here an evident allusion co the Va111an A vatalr and &111 
ICOl'J of Vish1.1u'a dcc:eiving Bali, 




PRAPA'THAKA Ill, 

when we perform our lo_ng sacrifice for the obtaining or 
rain. 

7, By Mld!iatitki. Colllj and drink, throughout all· 
the seasons, the moon.plant juice from the BrAhmal>As' 
golden bowl ; for thy friendship prevents the shedding of oul" 

blood, 6i ~l · 
8. By Medliatitlii. 0 Indra, recipient of praise, we are 

the persons who e11tol thee. 0 drinker of the moon-plant 
juice, do thou satisfy us with good things. 

9. By Vamadlva. 0 Indra, inform us in what sacrifice 
thou bestowest wealth. 0 · ever-victorious and most awful 
lord, do thou implant strength in our bodies. 

10. By S'rutakaksha. 0 lndra, thou art to be wor-
11hipped, because tbou lovest the offerer, art courageous, and 
immoveable, and also because .thy heart delights in divine 
worship, 

[£nd of the first half of the lnvQcation.] 

flFTH DAS'ATI, 

1, By Vas'ishtlia. 0 heroic Indra, we praise thee, who 
art the Sun* of this world, the lord of all things animate 
and inanimate, with the feeling newly calved cows (low for 
their calves). 

2. By Sanyu. 0 lndra, we, the singers of thy praise, 
invite thee that we may obtain wealth and food ; and we, 
the rest of the priests, call on thee, the protector of holy 
men, to destroy our enemies, and give us supplies of rain 
from the clouds. ' 

3. By Vdmad!va. I praise thee, I., the giver of 
riches; for thou art skilled in all science, liberal to those 
who sing .thy praise, and the possessor of vast riches which 
thoq bestQwest in a thousand ways. 

• Liter11lly, "1heeye o! heaven,'.: 




4. "y Nandkasa. We utter praise in the hall of obla- ' 
lion td thee, the suprenh! lord, who art the deatroy~r of· out 
foes, the subduer of the hosts of our ent:n~ies, who eatest 
the weaith-confei'ridg sacrificial fodd witb tbe eagerness that 
the milch-cow lows fbr IR!r call. . 

5. By K41ey11; I and my assistant priests, who sing 
with loud voices during the pressed moon-plant banquet, call 
for protection on 1ndra1 the acquiter of wealth b'y his 
own inherent merit, with the eagerness the warrior in battle 
shouts against his opponent. 

6. By Vi1s'i'sktka. The Suprerite Artist is willing to giYe 
Us food along with exalted wisddm ;* therefore do I with· 
my voice glorify that 1ndra, who is adored by crowds of 
worshippers, as tht carpenter brightens the beauteous wood 
by planing. 

7. By Mldltatithi. 0 Indra, drink of our savoury mixed 
moon-plant juice, satisFy thyself with it; and listen to us 
in the joyous, prospering, sacrificial aNembly, and let thy 
wisdom aid in preserving us. 

8. By 8harga. bo thou come to me, the possessor of 
wisdom, get acquainted with my wealth, rain down blessings 
on the Iovers·of cows and the lovers of hotses. 

9. By V11s'islztha. I, Vas'ishtha;t do not know your' 
movements, neverthdess let the lovely Maruts drink at our' 
moon-plant banquet to-day along with all the g'.l'ds. 

10. By Pragr1thtt, Do not celebrate any other god, 
0 my friends : do not destroy yourselves. Praise lndra1 • the· 
giver of tain, again and again, in the moon-plant saerifice, 
and celebrate him in sacred hymns. 

• Or a wlfe. 
t The N&IH' of Vas'lshtlra In the Teltt shows plainly, n1, tha! (fie' 

Ri1his are the real authors ol the Veda~ ; and, 2ndlyj that this Te111 
could not have been _written long before the time of Rama Chandra, will, 
whose preceptor, Vi&'wamilra, lhe author was contemporary, 




SIXTH DAS'ATl. 

r. By Pliruklnm4n. ·No foe can "by any acl staf t~ 
~IIerer of oblations, who by sacrifices makes a friend of lndra 1 
who ever advances his worshippers, is the slayer of eve11 
enemy, the mighty, the invincible, and, lhtough innate 
:strength, ever victorious. 

2. By Pragtitk,, We praise Indra, the wealthy, the 
possessor of immense riches ; who obliterated the fissure in 
the Vajra1* ever present in sacrifices, when it had been in• 
jured by strokes with collar-bone::s ; and again perfectly 
united it after it had been broken. · 

3. By Pra[dtka, 0 flowing-haired lndra, let thy hun-
tlreds and thousands of sacrificial-food-loving horses be yoked 
to the golden chariot, and bring thee to the moon-plant 
banquet. 

, 4. By Vis'wt1mitra. Come, 0 Indra, with thy sonorously 
neighing horses, whose hair is marked like peacocks' 
feathers.t Let no one, fowler•like1 dare to entangle thee and 
prevent thy coming; or, should any one venture to do so, march 
llgainst him with thy bow, and honour us with thy presence. 

5. By Gaufflma. 0 all-powerful, thou art the god that 
I renders a man truly illustrious. Possessor of ,vealth, there 

is no one besides thee that can confer happiness. Indra, I 
will speak abroad thy praises. 

6. By Purumidka. Thou, 0 lndra, art the possessor 
of food ;t thou art the superintendent of the purification of 
moon-plant juice, the lord of bodily strength ; thou,single 
and alone, slayest thy intimidated foes by the many-form, 
much-praised, warrior-grasped (Vajra). 

• I he word Vajra is usually rendered "thunderbolt." It is a kind 
of club with a round head filled with spikes, Such a club the Raluhu, 
at a !,ICrifice, holds to ward off improper vititan&s, l have nOI been 
"ble to asce,tain any thing further ol the legend alluded IO in the Text, 

t Tisi& seems 10 ltad 115 explain lndl'a's horaea Lo be Iha rainbow, 
f Or fame, 




·33 

t• We invite Indra to come to the feast 0£ t'he. gods,-- · 

~

dra, who is ever ready to proceed to the sacrifice; . We 
nvoke Indra, of moon-plant juice-1uaffing renown, to stand 
y us in the battle,-Indra, to give us wealth. 

8. l3y Medlldlztlii. 0 possessor of untold riches, let 
~he sol\gs of praise in which my friends extol thee meet with 
~ccep_tance ; and do ye who cover up the consecrated viands, 
by all-glorious learned priests, sing the praises of lndra in · 
~ucharistic hymns. 

9. By Mtdhatitki. Truly our sweetest and most melo .. 
dious notes of praise shall ascend to thee with the celerity 
of ever-conquering, treasure-bearing, safe-conveying, swift• 
llyjng chariots. 

10. By Medhritithi. 

1having quitted the deseq, 
!thirsty, so do thou come 
1 

' k 'h ' ,dnn wit our wise men. 

As the light-coloured (stag),* 
approaches the water pools when 
at the time of our banquet, and 

SEVENTH DAS'ATI. 

i. l3y Bkarga. Furnish us with wealth al\d all kind 0£ 
protection ; for, 0 hero, we worship thee, who, lik~ a wealthy 
man, art the provider of food and the possessor of riches. 

ll, By Ritu. 0 lndra, bring those provisions they 
possess from all the wealthy Asurs. 0 possessor of riches1 
nourish with them me, the singer of thy praise, and all those 
Who sit on thy regularly disposed sacrificial grass. 

3. By ']amadagni. Sing ye to the resplendent ones1 
Mitra, Aryam! (lndra), the conferrer of riches in reward of 
sacrifice, and Varu:r;ia, an adoratory, laudatory, melodious, 
and eucharistic song. 

41 By Medhatitlti. 0 Indra1 the preparers of the 
sacrifice, our mighty united band of pathetic singers, unite 

• Instead of su'pplying the word stag, we may supply lion, Both 
are menlloned in lhe Bh&shya, 

5 




34 

their voices, inviting thee to the early ban'quet, accompanied 
with hymns of praise, and celebrate thee1 the god of remote 
ages. 

5. By Purumedhas. 0 ethetial priests, do ye extol my 
5acrificial k.>d to the mighty lndra, who is the slayer of 

Vritra, the performer of a hundred sacrifices, and is even 
now ready to strike our cloud-shaped foe with his host. 
slaughtering thunderbolt. 

6. MMhatithi. 0 etherial priests, do ye celebrate the 
p18.ises of the mighty lndra, chief among the slayers of our 
foes, by whom light was produced, the maintainer of sacred 
rites ; who, in union with f e god Soma, truly acts fhe part 
of a divinity1 and who is ever alive to the interests ol his 
worshippers. 

7. Saktt (addresses lndra). 0 Indra, do thou, enter-
taining for us the affection a father does for his son, bring 
for us wisdom : do thou, the object of worship to adoring 
multitudes, grant in this sacrificial assembly of the gods, that 
we, the possessors of natural life, may obtain Jivine illumi-
nation. 

8. By lbhi. Do not, 0 Indra, cast us off; thou art the 
only source of our delight, and of that of the thousands of 
animated beings ; thou art our protector; thy favour we 
must obtain. Do not, 0 Indra, cast us off 

g. By Medliatitlzi. 0 slayer of our foes, we, the per-
formers of the moon-plant sacrifice, who take our seats on 
the sacrificial grass along with the sacrifice-consecrating 
priests, who sing thy praises, encircle thee all around, as the 
waters do the continental shores. 

10. ' By Sanyu. 0 Indra, bring along with thee what-
soever power and wealth is to be found among the descend-
ants of Nahusha,* and other beings, and whatever may be 

• i,,., among Raksha~as, Yakshas, and Gandharvas, 




DAS'J\TI VIII, 35 

~ the. five divisions of the earth ; and, at the same time, 
:onfer on us all bodily strength. 

EIGHTH DAS' ATI, 

1. By Medkdtitki. Thou, 0 rainer of blessings, art in · 
ruth, whilst o! protector, the universal perambulator. 0 
wful god, pourer down of rain, thy voice is heard in the 
JOst distant regions, while thy fame is spread abroad in our 
icinity, in this lower world. 

2. By Rebkas. Since, 0 foe-destroying Indra, always 
!accompanied by thy long-maned horses, thou art omnipotent 
in the far-distant regions of heavpn as ·Nell as in the nether 
sky, the performer of the moon-plant sacrifice continues 
paying his devotions to thee in hymns of praise. 

3. By Vatsa. Extol, with loud voices and feelings cor. 
responding to your words, in the midst of the pleasant ban-
quet of sacred food, the name of lndra, the all-wise hero, the 
renowned and all-powerful god. 

4. By Sanyu. 0 lndra, grant me, for my well-being, an 
abode composed of the three elements,* and the three 
destinations,t and magnificence like that enjoyed by the 
wealthy ; and scatter not such things away from us by thy 
thunderbolts. 

5. By Trimedkas. As the rays of light proceed from the 
'Sun as their centre, so are lndra's watery treasures distri-
ltuted abroad by his mighty power for the benefit of previous-
ly subsisting and incipient existences; therefore, as we offer a 
portion (of sacred food} to the manes of our fathers, so do we 
offer a portion to him. 

6. By Puruhanmdn. 0 ever-enduring soul, the man 
who does not give cannot receive food; hut the bountiful 

• Or gnds, depar1ed spirits, and men; or the three qualities of truth, 
acqui,i1iveness, and malil(nity. 

t Or the three fires ; or the lhrce god,; or the three daily sacrifices, 




PRAPA'THAKA Ill. 

man drives his well-matched chariot-horses like tadra, 1 
drives his golden-coloured* steeds. ' . 

7. By Trimedhas and P11rum!dkas. Put oo, as yo~ 
ornament, in every field o-f battle, the adorable lndra ;1and di 
thou, 0 slaughterer of our foes, ever victorious, worthy ~ th1 
highest praise, come to partake of the vidds ofJ;e~ed in OUi 
three daily sacrifices. 

8: By Vas'ishtha. Tho~, 0 lndra, prodocest th.e mo1 
precious metals, as well as those of inferior value: thine thei 
are, and thou art ever lord paramount over them ; but thor, 
is nothing that can confer additional dignity on th~, ib1 
shepherd of men. 

6. By Pragatha. What regions art thou traversing 
where art thou to be found ? for thy spirit is in so man: 
places. 0 belligerent hero, maker of war, rooter up of thi 
enemies' cities, wherever .thou mayest go, our songs of p,ai~ 
will extol thee. 

12. By Kali. Here do we this day approach the hoJde 
of the thunderbolt. Do ye bring the moon-plant juice fo 
him to.day, and celehrate anew the possessor of all fame. 

NINTH DAS'ATI. 

1. By Purukanmdn. I praise that chief of warriors wh, 
is the king of men, the performer of journeys in chariots, th, 
incomparable traveller, the subduer of all, the slaughterer o 
our foes. 

2. By Garbka. Since, 0 Indra, we fear thee, do tho: 
render us void of every other fear. 0 possessor of riches, i 
is for our preservation we ask this. Do thou, therefore, sla: 
all that hate us, and wish to engage in battle against us. 

• The origi11al word, Hari, noeans green or golden-coloured. The 
cloud1 may be supposed to be lndra's horm, and to them the latter epi• 
lhel is the more suitable, 




DAS''-fl JX, 37, 

3. By Mirl. 0 lord of ~ansions, thou art the support,. 
ing beam of our house, the coat of mail of ~he performer of 
moon.plant sacrifice, the god who is bedewed with moon-
pl_ant juice, the overturner of cities, the lord of many hosts. 
the bosom-friend of sages. 

4. By '}amadagni. Truly thou art mighty, 0 Sun : truly 
thou art mighty, descendant of Aditi : we adore the splendour 
o( thy essence, thy majesty, and thy glory ; for mighty art 
thou, 0 divine (Sun). 

5. By Devafithi. 0 lndra, thy friend the perfprmer · of 
the moon-plant sacrifice, the possessor of $teeds, who_ drives 
his chariot and 1s of the most engaging appearance, is coming 
with his travelling horses to thy solemn assembly, bringing 
with him that food thou art ever ready to accept, and with 
which thy service is always performed. 

6. By Puruhanmdn. 0 thunderbolt-wi~lding lndra, ·were 
there a hundred heavens, and a hundred earths, and in addi-
tion to them a thousand suns, and any other supposable crea-
tures, they could not contain thee ; for thou encirdest heaven 
and earth. ' 

7. By Devatithi. Since, 0 lndra, thou art invoked by 
mankind towards the east, the south, the north, and the west, 
and art the sender of abundance to multitudes of men, for 
their children, do thou, illustrious exploder of wind, send 
abundance to King Turvasa. 

8. By Vas'ishtha. What man is he that can overcome 
him whose treasure thou, 0 lndra, art? for, without doubt, 
possessor of riches, the owner of provisions, who prepares 
sacrificial viands to obtain heaven, is regarded as peculiarly 
thine. 

9. By BkaradwJ.ia. 0 lndra and Agni, the footless 
Morn is now advancing, outstripping all the tribes of men, 
3tl<l even the Sun himself, with her silver tongue,* and 

• Alluding to the singing of birds at the d11wn, 

' 




PRAPA1THAKA Ill. 

swift continued pace, passing over the heavens in thirty 

steps.* 
10. By Medkdtithi. Come close to us, 0 Indra, bringing 

with thee the aids resulting from sacrifices to the spirits of 
the departed. Come, 0 most felicitous divinity, with thos~ 
most happy beings to whom we, in a special manner, offer 
oblations. Come, 0 Great Father, along with the spirits. of 
our fathers. · 

TENTH OAS1ATI. 

1. By TrimMhas. We call for protection from hence on. 
thee, the undecaying, the slaughterer of our foes, the un-
changeable, the fleet, the victorious, the slayer of enemies, 
the famed charioteer, the invulnerable, the increaser of the 
_supplies of water. 

2. By Vas'ishtha. Let not thy usual place of pleasure 
and relaxation be far distant from our sacrificing priests; 
but, on the contrary, come from afar to our deity-delight-
ing assembly, and dwell amoug us and listen to our invoca-
tions. 

3. By Vas'ishtha. Offer ye up expressed moon-plant 
liquor to the moon-plant-drinking, th0under-bolt-wielding 
Indra. Prepare the sacrificial viands for his nouri~hment, 
subject them to the necessary purifications, and fill up his 
joy with the satisfying offerings. 

4. By Sanyu. We call upon Indra, who is always the 
slaughterer of our foes, who surveys all creation, is mighty 
in splendour,t of surpassing might, and lord of saints. Be 
thou present, to exalt us in every conflict. 

5. By Puruchchhesha. 0 (sons of As'wini) WPalthy 
through meritorious acts, grant to us as the fruit of our 
solemn rites, day and night, all we desire, and never by any 

• The thirty Muhtlrtas of which a day and night con5ist, 

t Or wrath, 




~S1Afl I. 39 • 

lttearts destroy our gift, never (destroy). the gift we present 
to you. 

6. By V4madeva. Whenever the priest who chants the 
sacred verses pra.ises the sender of water,* the famous Indra, 
the supporter of· the various kinds of religious rites, let him 

celebrate his praises in a highly laudatory tone, 

7. By Vatsa. 0 Indra, who art a guest at our sacrifice, 
preserve the sacrificial food with the pleasant moon-plant 

juice, for thyself, the possessor of the party-coloured horses1 
the golden lndra, the wielder of the golden thund,erbolt. 

8. By Bharga. Let lndra listen to both our praises 
and ~ur prayers, till he grant us our desire; and may the 
ever-moving, the pbssessor of wealth, who is powerful 

through merit, come to the moon-plant banquet. 
9 By Pragatha. 0 wielder of the thunderbolt, thou 

art not impoverished by a noble and surpassingly splendid 

gift, not by one of a thousand pieces' value, no, nor by one 
of ten t11ousand ; not even, possesor of wealth, by such a gift 
a hundred times repeated. 

10. By Pr11g,itl1a. 0 Indra, thou abidest more closely 
by me than a father or ~ generous brother ; thou protectest 
me like a tender mother ; therefore, as thou hast taken up 
thy abode with us, do thou surround us with all thy wealth. 

PRAPA'THAKA IV. 

FIRST DAS' ATI. 

r. By V,as'ishtha. This well-pressed moon-plant juice, 
mixed with sour curds, is for Indra. O holder of the 

• The attentive reader, who can bear the grossness or simplicity of 
the 11llusion, will be able 10 reco~cile the translation 10 the Text, 




l>rtAPA'ttlAKA l'\11 

t~underbolt, come to the sacrificd ~ house, along wlth thy palt 
of horses, to partake of the delight-inspiring banquet, 

. 2. By Va111ade-oa. These moon-plants1 accompanied 
with sacred hymns, are prepared for thy delight, 0 lndra, 
Drink· the pleasant juice) listel\ to our songs) and grant the 

I 

singer his request, 0 recipient of praise. 
3. By Soma. I invite Indra to be present with us to. 

day; for he is the cow producing the water of life, and is 
tnanifested in the form of the sacred BrAhmanical verse. 
He is the good milch-cow) the inexhaustible) the providet 
of provisions for sacrifice, who pours forth large streams of 
milk, and is richly adorned with ornaments. 

4. By Ned/ta. The mighty and inaccessible mountains 
tlo not keep thee back; 0 lndra, when thou comest to confer 
wealth on one like me, who celebrates thy praise ; nor can 
any thing destroy what has been acquired by thy blessing. 

5. By Medkati'thi. Who, besides me, knows Indra? 
Do thou, therefore, with thy attendants, drink my ·moon• 
plant juice ; for who else prepares the life-giving food? 
lndra, by his might, beats cities to dust. May he, then, 
famed for his beautiful countenance, be gratified by our 
viands. 

6. By Tauras'ravasa. While lndra, the possessor of 
riches, punishes the neglecters of sacred rites, by driving 
them beyond the pale of the sacred assembly, let him, at the 

1 same time, carry forward our much-desired moon-plant sacri• 
lice to a prosperous issue, for the benefit of our host. 

7. By Twisltta. Let the Divine Artist preserve to us the 
divine gift of speech, and Brahma~aspati give us rain, and 
Aditi save us, and our sons and ~randsons, from the ma1icious 
violence and reproach of our enemies. 

8. By Vamadlva. Thou, 0 giver of riches, art lord 
supreme, and yet thou regularly findest thy way to the1sacri• 
ficer's; and the valuable gift sent by thy divine majesty, 
without fail, reaches its destination, 




41 

~: · · By )/ld'!tltiiki. 0 lndra, most mighty slaughte.rer ◄ 
i&t our foes, possessor of riches, inspirer of dread, do thep, 
:yoke thy gotden-t.oloured horses, and come forth with ,all ~ 
speed into our presence, to drink the moon-plant juice. • 

10, N,imelka. 0 lndra, holder of .the thunderbolt •• Olh 
•ctivet1 moving fellow-sacritkers are to-day extolling t~e~ 
lndra, the offerers of praise ate here ; listen to their aongs, 
and comie'to our aMde. 

S'£COND DAS' ATI. 

~. By Vas''isktha. The Morn, daughter of heaven, now 
begins to appear, and to advance along with the heavens, 
'Shedding her light abroad, subduing with her brilliant eye the 
mighty power of darkness, and, united with bands of illustri-
'Ous men, causing the day to shine. 

2. By Vas'isktka. These heaven-meriting sacrifices call 
upon you, 0 twin sons of As'wini, as the cow calls on her 
calf; and since ye ii.re ready to come to all, ye bestowers of 
wealth in reward of merit, my soul also calls on you for pro-
tection. 

3. By As'wina. 0 divine sons of As'wini, who is the 
man, or where is his abode, who, distressed by destructive 
famine, has applied to you, and offered up to you sacrifice 
with moon~ptant juice in vain ? 

4. By Kutsa. 0 twin sons of As'wini, this most pleasant· 
juice of pres11ed moon-plants is prepared for you in the, 
heaven-meriting sacrifice. Having come this day to our 
sacrifice, drink of it, 0 twin sons of As'wini, and afterwards 
bestow precious gifts on our host, who presides at the solem-

nities. 
5. By Pragatka. Ever, by the dripping noise of the 

moon-plant juice, as well as by articulate sounds, am l invit-
ing thle (0 Tndra); wherefore, then, shouldst thou rage at 
the sacrific!l like a fierce lion ? for who 'Viii not pray to tliee, 
the supreme lord ? 

6 




PRAPA1THAilA iv. 

. 6_ By JJltitflit/zi. o offlciati~g pr~ests; lndra''Wisbes ta 
drink the moon-plant juice, and, with his powerful golden. 

,toloured horses yoked to the chariot, the foe-destroyert 1 
' C\>mes into our presence. 

l By Vas'isht1a· 0 wealthy lndra, grant to me1 wb( 
-am of low degree, a large portion ; for thou art the possessoi 
. of riches, and the god invoked in every war. 

8. By Vas'ishtlta. 0 Indra, I am lord of as many trea. 
sures as thou art, and I support him who sings the praises ( ol 
the gods). Distributer of wealth, I, too, give without any evil 
intention, 

9, · By NrimMka. Thou, 0 indra, att ever ready to slay 
thy foes, and overcomest all that war against thee. 0. thou 
destroyer o( the impious, our father, the foe-slaughterer, thou 
slayest all who wish to slay thee. 

10. By Medha. Thou, by thy mighty power, s1ayest thy 
foes, and from thy heavenly abode, (like a cloud of) dust, en-
velopest the earth, and with thy embrace surroundest all the 
world. 

THIRD DAS'ATI. 

t,, Ry Pas'ishtha. I, the prepafer of sacrifice for the 
gods, offer the produce of the cow and other viands, in thes"' 
solemn rites, to fodra, who, from the first, has been tongini 
for our praise. 0 possessor of the gdlden-cofoured horses 
we acknowledge thee by these oblations, and do thou ackrrow, 
ledge our sacred songs presented to thee along with sweet 
viands. 

2. By Vas'ishtha. 0 Indra, worshipped by adoring mul-
titudes, come to the sacred enclosure constructed by the 
priests in thy hall. Since thou art our protector and 
nourisher, grant us wealth, and satisfy us with moon-plant 
juice. 

• Or cloud-striker ; qr sl11yer of Vritra, 




D~S'.&Tl 111; 

3., By Gri#amada. He who rends the el(!uds .and 
~ates the waters, who is the sender and restrainer of rain, 
1d the giver of gifts, is lndra, who forms the mighty ~t~iid., 

nd sends down torrents of wa~er, is the bestower of bless- ' 
1gs, and the undecaying god. 

4. 0 Indra, possessor of riches, we, when preparing' the 
noon-plants, praise thee ; and thee we praise while present-
ng the offering of sacred food. Bring thou for us a posterity 

~

ossessed of wealth derived from thee, and grant that through 
hy protection we may be enabled to keep our inferiors in 

ubjection and conquer our enemies. 
' 5. By Sahago. We, who are eager for the posses~ion of 
riches, take hold of thy right hand, 0 Indra, lord of wealth. 
We know thee, 0 mighty god, to be lord of cattle; give us 
then that wealth which consists in cows that yield large sup-
plies of milk. 

7. By Vas'ishtha. Men call on Indra while engaged in 
war, that they may obtain merit, and thus insure success: 
Do thou grant (Indra) to the illustrious attendants on the sa-
crifice, that they may have their cow-houses filled with desira-

. hie cows. 
7. By Gourizo£ti. 0 ye fleet rays, that, like birds, ascend 

to the seat of your lord, that delight in sacrifice, survey all 
things, and present our petitions, do ye veil the waters, and 
dissipate the darkness, grant us clear vision, and release ·us 
from the snare in which we are entangled. 

8. By Veno.. Those who from their hearts desire union 
with the Divine Being, in the heavens in the bosom of Yama, 
look with steady vision to thee, glorious in thy gait and in thy 
goings forth with golden plumage, the messenger of VaruJ].a, 

the powerful, the magnificent. 
9. By Kula. The first-born glorious Brahma has, from 

of old, shed abroad his brilliant rays to the utmost bounds of 
space, and now sheds them abroad to the regents of all the 
different points in the heavens, which are the reducers to 




• PRAPA'T8AK6, W, 

i,rm of ~~ world, ~d evl!r>;"ere ~eticli.i,1 ie tbt wo,rs 
~f trutl> and falsehood.* 
' 10. , By S11h,t~.a. Let all ,114wly invwated and an tong 
approved delisht-conferri11g byU111a of pc;1ise be- S®fl • 
honour of the mighty, the heroic, the powerfWi, the foe~ 
dest~oyiog, large-bodied god, who is the bolder et the abtUn~ 
derbolt, and the ancient of days. 

FOURTH DAs' ATI. 

1. By Dyutaaa. The water that resides in- the rf:yer-
Ams'umatf, t dark by its whirlpools, res,embling ~-pkftt 
juice, 11;nd to be approached only with tens of tho1161lnd& of 
followers, came to lndra, the subduer of foes by accumulated 
merit, when he stopped the slaughtering army by the river's 
current ; for lndra regards with favour the performers oi 
sacred rites. 

2. By Dyutana. 0 Indra, when fleeing from Vfitdsura's 
wrath, all the gods, thy friends, deserted thee ; thou· M(?ne, 
with the Maruts,t didst conquer the enemy's anny. Le, 
thy friendship be manifested to us. 

3. By Brihadukta. I praise the sustainer of the world► 
hjm who laid hold of the whole multitude of bis herd 0£ 
cattle during the conflict, wh~ though aged, is ever young. 
Behold the wisdom of the god Indra; even at this day it is 
he who stops the breath of life.~ 

4. By Dyutana. 0 lndra, thou becamest the confem 
of. happiness when brought forth by the seven frienal 
(Rishis). Then didst thou from thy hiding-pi.ace manifet 
thyself to the heavens and to the earth, and enter the fieli 
of battle, for the benefit of the inhabitants of the terrestrla 
and celestial regions. 

• Trutla Htl /11,ls,hood mCGns the present mixed state ol thi11ga. . 
t Tho V .-ri111i4, i The winds, ' 
§ M.-ning that the age ol miracles and Hmlll,on flbeurl is pat 

1114 God is now kn_own by his pro-viden~. 




DAS'A'fl, v: 

'5• ,Sy Y4r,itidfva. I .praise thee, 1lbe hol6r of dje. 
wnderbok, thee who speakest like the god of ~; who-
earest the crown, the possessor oE immense weMtb, the 
,rd of all1 the constant participator in our sacrificies; th& 
weller in heaven, and slayer of the cloud-shaped demo11 
r.itra, Desirous of circumventing (mine Remmes), l praiae 
1ee, the lord supreme, and slayer of foes. 

6. By Vas'ishtha. As for you (my priests), do ye bring 
!offerings for the mighty one, who, for his inteHectual benefit, 
greatly exalts the sacrificer i and, at the same time, sing 
your best songs of praise·: and as for thee, 0 satisfier 06 the 
wants of mankind, do thou come to our people wfu), aie: 
stationed all around. 

7, By Vi.s'w4mitra. In this war, I call on Indra, the 
conferrer of happiness, the possessor of wealth, the gra:teat 
of heroes, who hears our prayers, and is most forward to 
confer on us the provisions of our foes, and to aid \IS in. 
battle; for be is the slayer of our enemies, and the victorious. 
spoiler of their wealth. 

8. By Vas'isktha. 0 Vas'ishtha, do tbou send sacrificial 
viands to Indra, and praise him in the war; for it is be who,. 

I by his might, everywhere preserves all religious rites, and 
is the hearer of our praises, which we ca1.1se to ascend from, 
every quarter. 

g. By Gtzuri. This circle,* fiexd in the waters, and1 
growing up to the very heavens, solicits for the inhabitants. 
of this world the sweet aqueous liquid,. which resides in the-
rays of light, which lndra gives forth for the supply oi food. 

FIFTH DAS'ATI, 

1. Td,-ks4ya. I, TArkshya, call on the provider of food'. 
the leader of the gods, who exists by his own po~er, the 
destroyer of our enemies' chariots, who is possessed of ~& 

·• 'J he Brahmanical emblem ol Vi11hnu. Hens the rainbow is mean&. 




PRAPA'THAKAi rv. 

indestructible thunderbolt, the v;ctorious in the field of battle, 
the ever-moving Itidra, to come quickly hither for our e~ 
and happiness. 

2. By Garga. I call, in every contest, on Indra the 
deliverer, the preserver, who deserves to be specially invoked, 
the heroic, the powerful, who is adored by all the numerous 
tribes of men. Let that wealth-possessing Indra partake of 
our offering. 

1, 3. By Vemada. We worship Indra, who grasps with 
his right hand the thunderbolt, the driver of the excellent, 
manreuvre-performing gold-coloured horses, who causes the 
hair of his foes to stand on end through terror, and inspires 
them with dread by his armies seizing their wealth. 

4. By Vdmadeva. We worship Indra, who ever slays 
his foes, and ever subdues them like a mighty hero, (Indra) 
the great, the unequalled, the supreme, the eminent holder 
of the Vajra, the slayer of the cloud-shapped demon, the 
accepter of th,e sacrificial food, the giver of wealth, the 
wealthy, the possessor of excellent precious stores. 

5, By Vdmadeva. The man who slays us and bestows 
our goods on others, and who, though a murderous wretch, 
boasts of his liberality, I will destroy, 0 Indra, eithe~ in 
battle or by my bodily strength. This I am determined 
to execute through thy aid, 0 supreme lord. 

~- By V4madeva. It is Indra, whom warriors invoke 
when engaged with their enemies, and whom th:ise who · 
bound along in chariots, those who stand in the field of 
battle, and those who desire rain invoke, and whom the 
learned BrAhma1;1s supply with their offerings. 

7, By Vis'wamitra. 0 Indra and Parvata, come in your 
spacious chariot to the house of him who invites you to the 
acceptable sacrificial viands ; of him who, with his sons and 
grandsons, partakes of the sacred food. 0 ye gods, praised 
in hymns and satisfied with food, grow great by the offerings 
presented in our sacrifice. 




• l>AS1 ATI Vf, 
• 

§. · . By Iti,u. (The worshipper) sends up matty collec.• 
ted hymns of praise, fot the obtaining of water1 to ~n~~. 
who from the top* of the skies, turning round on all sides, 
renders the heaven and earth stablt., as (the carpenter does) 
the wheels of a chariot by joining them to the axle. 

9. By Vasu. Truly these, my friends, come into close 
contact with thee by their friendly offices ; do thou, there-
fore, the possessor of water, come to us in floods, advan .. 
cing, most wise lord, with the speed a son comes to save his 
father, while protecting the accumulated household treasures. 

ro. By Gautama. Who is the first of men 7 It i9 he who 
strengthens by food the hard-working, foe-scorning, rampant, 
rain-dispensing, delight-conferring cattle attached to the pole 
of Indra's chariot. 

[End of the verses in the Trisktup Measure.] 

SIXTH DAS' ATI. 

t, By Madhuclthanda. The (Sima Veda) singers sing 
thy praise, the (Rig Veda) chanters chant to the god of song, 
and the officiating (Yajur Veda) priests extol thee, 9 lndra, 
the performer of a hundred sacrifices, with the eagerness 
they extol their ancestors. t 

(Hi_, V. 1 M, 3 A, 3 5. I R,) 
2. By Yata. Let every voice extol Indra, who is 

diffused on every side like the ocea,1,t is the most excellent 
conductor of chariots, lord of food, and the protector of 
holy men. 

3. By Gautamn. 0 lndra, drink this ancient, immortality. 
conferring, moon-plant juice, the intoxicator of S'ukra.~ Let 
the sacrificial streams flow into thee in the sacred enclosures. 

• Lit,rally, the root,, 
t Or as dAncers raise their dancing-pole, 
t Or the sky. 
f The tlory of S'ukra's drunkenness is given at length in the lltn,y• 

Puriin11. Completely to destroy and prevent the re1111Citation of Kic:h■; 




. ·•143 
,' .. 

\>RA'PA'TllAdt)V, 

4-. By Atri. 0 variegated<l-ndra, there is nothing in tt1y 
house wort!1¥ of being presented to • thee. 0 thundenir, 
f)Osiiesor of wealth, tonvey to us riches with both thy 
handt. 
. S• By 1'iras'chi. 0 lndra, hear the invocation of me the 
hrave, moon-plant sacrifice-performing Tiras'<:hi, who comes 
as thy suppliant. Satisfy me with wealth, for thou art of a 
noble disposition. • 

6. By Giutama. 0 lndra, subduer of thy foes, powerful 
god1 let the pressed moon-plants yield satisfaction to thy 
senses, as th·e Sun does by his rays to the world under his 
inflll'Cnce. 

7. By Medh4tithi. Come, 0 Indra, possessor of brilliant 
treasures, with thy golden-coloured horses, down from thy 
heavens to our cancert, excellent as that of the Rishi Ka1,1wa, 
and then proceed from this world to the heavens of the 
!Supreme ruler. 

8. By Ti/as' cki. 0 worthy of all praise, let our eucharis• 
tic songs fix thee, as firmly as the charioteer is fixed in his 
seat,· and let their symphony sound before thee, like the low-
ing of newly calved cows for their calves. 
· 9. By Vis'wamanas. We desire to praise that lndta who 
mightily exalts his worshippers with pacificatory songs and 
Jacrt:d verses. May he, the quaffer of the sacred IJlixed 
moon-plant juice, drink even to repletion. 

10. By,Sanyu. 0 wealthy Indra, who art superior to all 
in riches, and possessest the largest store of sacred viands, 
hird of the food offered to the manes, this pressed moon-plant 
julce is prepared for thee : . drink of it even to repletion. 

the son of Vrihasp•ti, the Asuras kilied him, burnt him, and mingled 
his ashes with spirits, which they made S'ukra drink, But it was of no 

• avail. S'ukra revived l<acha in his own belly, ta .. ght him the resuscita• 
tive Mantra, had himself ripped up, Kacha taken out, and his own life 
~gain restored by the Mantra, A11noyed, it is said, at this tranllllt;lion, , 
he cursed all drinkers of spirits, 




DAS'Atl VII. 49 

SEVENTH DAS'ATI, 

'- l\y 8kardw4ja. Sring all the iessels ; for the wise 
•nara) who desires 011r drink-offerings, is i he,:oic god, the 
lnighty traverser of space, going forth a.nd returning ha.ck 
again. 

a-. By r/4madl-oa. Thou didst utterly contemn the fixed 
doud (Vfitra) reposing on the mo11ntain top, and the mighty 
sacriftcer1 and the harsh words of thy foes. 

:\, By PriyamldAa. We engage in thy wohhip, 0 lndra1 
of great bodily might, to obtain thy succour. Increase thou 
our happiness progressively, like the motion of a chariot; for 
thou art the performer of many meritorious acts, the subduer 
of armies, and the protector of holy m·en. 

4. By Prag4tl,,a. 1-te holds the first place among the 
V1·ealthy1 who renders himself conspicuous by the performance 
of sacrifice, and whom Indra, our patriarch and father, 
through whose favour the means of performing sacrifice are 
procured, renders conspicuous among; the gods. 

5, By '(I 4madeva. Wherever the swift· brilliant horses 
carry thee in thy chariot, there they drink the pleasant swei:t 
juice, and there they prepare the sacred provisions. 

6. By Sanyu. I praise thee the indestructible, the lord 
of strength1 the subduer of all, the hero, thee who art pos-
sessed of stores of provisions, and the possessor of all 
knowledge. 

7, By Vdmadha. I celebrate the tamer of multitudes of 
horses, and his victorious fleet horses. May he bestow on us 
all the excellent things that occasion happiness, and preserve 
our lives. 

8. By ']eta. It is lndra who was the destroyer of the 
cities of the Asuris, who is ever young, who is of incalculable 
might, the sustainer of all the works of man, the holder of the 
thunderbolt1 and the recipient of the praises of myriads. 




50 PRA~A'THAKA rv. 

EIGHTH OAS' ATI. 

1. By Pramtdha. l offer, with all my heart, the thric,v• 
sacred song of praise to the all-resplendent l;rd, while my 
friend, with all his skill, serves him in performing the sacrifice 
and presenting the offering. 

2. By Kaiyapa. Indra's pair of courageous horses are 
said to belong to the creation of the all-wise Kas'yapa, 
through whom all our rites and sacrifices become glorious. 

3. By Priyam.Mha. 0 my friends, praise ye-O sons of 
Priyamedha, praise lndra, and let his grandsons also join in 
praising him, with all the fire a mighty man displays in at-
tacking a powerful enemy. 

4. By Madhuchhanda. We offer the eucharistic magni-
fying song of praise to lndra, the rebuker of hosts of foes, 
with the affection that that mighty god rejoices in our moon-
plant offerings and friendship.* 

5. By I'riyamedha, I call on you, the lord of all, 
the preserver of strength undiminished, and of all other 
desirable things, for the protection of our footmen and 
charioteers, 

6. By Bharadwaja. He who with all his heart praises 
the indestructible hero is the man who subdues his foes, and 
who, glorious in himself, escapes, through thy aid, from every 
formidable enemy, and from all sin. 

7. By Atri. 0 lndra, our lord, the performer of merit. 
conferring acts, bestow on us large gifts from thy treasures. 
Above all things, 0 all-surveying and most bountiful divinity, 
grant us wealth. 

8. By Praskaiiwa. Like the swift-moving_ birds at the 
refulgent dawn, · thou visitest all the biped and quadruped 
tribes, and movest through all the stages of time, encircling 
the whole heavens. 

• Ct. 8.g1 V. I, M. 3 A. 3 S. s R. 




DAS'ATI IX. 

9. By Trita.* 0 all ye gods that are stationed in the 
shining firmament of heaven, this long-continued invocation 
is addressed to you, from the place where th~re, is a since~e 
offerer, and the water of life prepared for you. 

10. We are worshipped in chanted hymns and songs of 
praise by him who performs these rite;, He is presenting a 
sacrifice for the gods in the brilliant assembly of priests. 

NINTH DASA'TI. 

1. By Tris'oka. All the armies and heroes come together 
to lndra, the subduer of our foes, the indestructible, the 
inspirer of awe, the possessor of great bodily strength, the 
fleet, the preserver. Prepare and offer up the excellent 

• glorious sacrifice in the sacred place. 
2. By Sumedha. I offer sacrifice to thee, the chief of 

the shining hosts. Thou slewest the cloud-shaped demon, 
and dispersedst water for the benefit of mankind. The two 
shining worlds and the earth come to thee with fear and 
awe, on account of thy might, holder of the thunderbolt. 

3. By Vamadeva. Come all of you and join in praising 
him, who, on account of his might, is lord of heaven, who 
alone is honoured as a guest by all men. Anxiously desirous 
to come to the newly prepared sacrifice, he proceeds the 
first to the place where the solemnities are being conducted . 

. 4. By Satya. 0 lndra, recipient of the praises of 
myriads, meeting no obstruction, do we approach thee. 0 
possessor of much wealth, and worthy to be extolled, there 
is no one worthy of praise equal to thee, who graciously 

• To explain this and the next Rich, th! Bha'shya gives the follow-
ing legend. "Apta R,shi had three sons: in returning late from a 
sacrifice one of them either fell, or was driven by his brothers, into a dry 
well. There, without Rny materi~ls, he goes thrnugh in imagination all 
the forms of a sacrifice, invoking especially V ~iha~p-1ti, who invokes 
the gods, and indiices them to accept his offering and deliver him," 




PRAPA'THAKA IV, 

'delightest in our eucharistic hymns, as a man delights in the 
praises of his friend. 

5. By Tlis'wdmitra. Our many faultless songs are daily 
sung to extol lndra, the supporter of mankind, the wealthy, 
the causer of increase,. who is worshipped. by myriads, is 
immortal, and worthy to be extolled by all. 

6. By Krisltta. Your heaven-directed minds, all 
ascending in union, and desirous (of his favour), praise 
lndra, and depend on him, the wealthy son of Aditi, for 
protection, as a wife does on her husband. 

7, By Angina. Do ye satisfy with delight that f11dra 
who assumed the shape of a ram, who is invoked by l?Yriads 
and praised in songs, the ocean of wealth, to whom the two 
worlds go in suppliant guise, the almighty~ the beloved. 
Extol ye him, the possessor of wisdom, that ye may obtain 
happiness. 

8. Dy Satya. Worship the ram* who inhabits heaven, 
whom many unite by praising him in hundreds of songs; 
and forward the sacrificial viands, as men do grain to their 
horses, along with faultless hymns to that Indra, who comes 
in his sacrifice-going chariot, in order to afford us protection. 

9. By Bltaradwdja. The mighty earth which receives 
the water for the sustenance of all beings, the two worlds, 
the distillers of water and of excellent form, dissolve through 
the operation of Varu1,1a into the form of watery torrents, 
and yet continue free from all decay. 

10. By Medhatithi. 0 Indra, thou diffusest water 
through the two worlds as the morn diffuses light. The 
excellent goddess mother produced thee to be the lord of the 
heavenly hosts and J;he illustrious ruler over men. 

11. By K1;1tsa. Worship ye ,in songs of praise the joy-
ful lndra, who propels the dark pregnant clouds with rapid 

• i.e, lndra; see the precedinll' Rich ; and consider how far this 
may be connected wi1h 1he horned Egyp1ia11 god, and the first sign in 
the Ecliptic, 




.53 

moti'Gn ; for; anxious for water, we call on the sender of rain. 
who holds "the thunderbolt in his right hand, and is the lor<l 
of the Maruts, in order that we may enjoy his friendship. 

[End"/ the -uerses in tlu: Anasktup Mette.] 

TENTH DASA'TI, 

1. By Narada. Indra goes to the place where are 
pressed moon-plants ; for he is of a noble disposition, and 
knows what kind of a sacrifice is there offered up by me the 
extoller of the gods. 

2. By Gos'ukti and As'was'ukti. Sing ye songs with 
your voices to Indra, who is worshipped by myriads and 
praised by myriads. Come ye, and sit as suppliants before 
the roighty one. 
. 3, 0 holder of the thunderbolt, we speak in honour of 
thee, the possessor of all joy, the lender of rain, the subduer 
of hosts, and the fashioner of worlds. 

4. By Parvata. Because, 0 lndra, accompanied by 
• Vishl}.u, by Trita, A'pta, and the Maruts, thou drinkest to 

satisfaction of the moon-plant juice, we worship thee. 
5. By Vis'wamanas. 0 sacrificing priests, pour out the 

juice that inspires delight* more than alcohol, (and serve it 
up) along with the sacrificial viands ; for it is intended for the 
hero who ever prospers those who celebrate his praise. 

6. By Vis'wamanas. Do ye pour out the pleasant moon. 
plant juice ; for the god sends us wealth in abundance, im-
pelled by his own benevolent disposition. 

7. By Vis'wamanas. 0 my friends, let us praise Indra, 
the hero who is worthy of all praise, who singly subdues all 
the hoi;ts of his enemies. 

8. By Nrimedha. Sing loud songs of praise to the 
mighty and wise lndra, the creator of food, the possessor of., 
knowledge, who thirsts for your praises. · 

• Or more intoxicating. 




54 PRAPA'THAKA V. 

9. He who alone gives we1lth in abundance to the man 
who performs sacrifice, is the invincible lord, lndra. 

ro. By Vis'wamanas. 0 my friends, we pray to 
lndra, the holder of the thunderbolt, for food. I praise 
him who acts most humanely towards you, and subdues 
our foes. 

PRAPA'THAKA V. 

FIRST DAS'ATI. 

1. By Pratdtha. 0 lndra, in this assemblage of the 
gods, I praise that accomparable strength of thine by which 
thou slewest the cloud-shap~ demon. 

2. By Bharadwaja. It is the spirit of that same pressed 
moon-plant which, when thou hadst quaffed, thou slewest (the 
giant) S'ambara, that I now offer thee. Drink of it, therefore, 
0 lndra. 

3. By Nrimedha. 0 ever-victorious and most meri-
torious, come to us ; for, like a mountain, thou pre-
sent~st thy huge front on every side, and art lord of the 
heavens. 

4. 0 most powerful Indra, we desire that joyous sensa-
tion, which, arising from plenteous potations of the moon-
plant juice, delights the mind, and under the influence of 
which thou slewest the cannibal Atrina. 

5. By lrimiri. 0 descendant of Aditi, worthy to re-
ceive oblations, cause that our lives may be lengthened so 
that we may enjoy long life: favour our descendants, and in-
crease our property. . ' 

6. By Vis'wamanps. 0 thou, in whose hand is the thun-
derbolt, assure us of the dispersion of the band of death-
bringing demons, in the same manner as the rising Su11 daily 




55 

assures us that all the animated tribes will disperse them-
selves abroad. 

7. By lrimiri. 0 Son of Aditi, th~u drivest away 
disease and every hurtful and malidous foe : do thou separate ' 
us from every thing that is sinful. 

8. Ry Vas'ishtha. 0 Indra, drink the moon-plant JUtce; 
and let that delight thee, 0 possessor of the golden--coloured 

horses, which I, the director of the sac.:rilice, have ordered to 

he bruised with stones, by the arms of the officiating priests, 

joined together like yoked horses. 

SECOND DAS'ATI. 

I. By Saubhari. 0 Indra, thou art united in family 
and associated in war with him who is without enmity and 

free from sin, and with such thou choosest the closest 

alliance. 

2. By Saubhari. 0 my friends, I praise that lndra, 
whose coming has long been greatly desired by you and by 

us, that he may grant us protection. 

3. By Saubhari. Come to our sacrifice, permit no 
calamity to befall us, stand not at a dist~nce, 0 Maruts, who 

march in opposition to our foes, who shine forth with eq~al 
lustre, and who destroy the powerful hosts of our adversaries. 

4. By Saublzari. Lord of horses, lord of cows, and 
lord of earth, come to this splendid sacrifice. Lord of the 

moon-plant, drink thou of the moon-plant juice. 

5. By Prayifga. 0 our lord, united to thee ·.ve can 
speak with him who breathes out threatenings against us, and 

stand in the battle against the cow-stealing tribe. 

6. By Saubhari. As are the rays of light, so are ye, 
0 Maruts, all of equal splendour, united as brothers in the 

closest family bond, and inhabitants of all quarters of 'the 

world, ~pport, in a body, the performer!\ of sacrifice. 




7. By Nrimldha. 0 lndra, full of merit, and obm\'et 
of all things1 , bring us strength, bring us wealth, and herQes 
who will crush our foes in battle. 

'8. By Nrimedlta. 0 Indra1 worthy of all praise1 we 
pray to thee for all desirable things, and prepare for thee 
this sacrifice with the ieal the merchant embarks .on the 
water~. 

9. By Sau6h,ri. 0 lndra, while in thy presence1 we 
utter praises to thee, collected, ·as birds in their roost, to 
drink sweet inebriating, eloquence-inspiring* juice mixed 
with the produce of the cows. 

10. By Saubluiti, 0 holder of the thunderbolt, like to 
whom none previously existed, we who desire the favour of 
the gods, and are like those who forward carts of grain, 
invoke thee, possessed of variegated splendour. 

THIRD DAS1ATI. 

1. By (Jotama. The delightsome brilliant rays of light1 
which accompany the rain-dispelling lord, drink the delicious, 
sweet, all-pervading Guice) offered in this sacrifice, and satisfy 
all the world under their dominion. 

:i. By Mada. The BrAhmal). is preparing, according to 
Uie instituted form, the increase-causing juice contained in 
the delight-inspiring moon-plant ; therefore, 0 possessor of 
great bodily strength, grasper of the thunderbolt, send down 
the moving heavens, and disperse the rain-bearing clouds 
over all thy dominions. 

3. By Gotama. We call on tharlndra, who grows great 
by the sweet moon-plant juice1 and who, through his might1 
slays Vritra and all our foes, that he may come to our pro• 
tection in our great wars, and preserve us in every lesser 
conflict. 

• Those who have heard sung the praises of the j.uice of the grape, 
or ol the llarlt1,br~, will not millaic tbe m~ing qi thil flhet. 




'.'.57 

4. 'By Gof ama. 0 l:ndra, gaspet l)f the thunderbolt; 
\lie ftl1i-.,. w ~ mll!>l'l-~l.,nt c~ebrate t~y u.11,qu"fted 
s.~Jlg~, by whiclt, ~l)~te4 wbh w~~om, t~pu di4Jt tlq't)Je 
tOJJt)' Mt~w, .th•• (Qnferring lJ. bl~s,1ng Pll ~y do1Pinicms. 

5. 'By (;a,:,ta'/11,I, Come, 0 lndra) with i;peed, and snb• 
due a'lld trample (oar foes) under-foot) since thy Vajra 111 
irresis'tib~. To t~ee belong wealth and power ; therefote 
slay the cloud-shaped demon, and supply us lllli'ith 'l'l"atet, 
blessing thy dominions. . 

6. By Gauiama. When, 0 lndra, those who come to 
worship invoke thee, and delight thee with sacrificial \l'iands, 
tmd 'C'erentonres used fot the obtaining victory over our 
enemies, then do thou yoke thy banquet-going horses, and 
having slain some one and sriied his wealth, bestow it on us. 

7. Bf Ga•tama. the beloved (manes of our ancestotsi 
which before were trembling through hunger, have now 
'eaten and are satisfied. They are the subject of our praise, 
they shine by unhorrowed light, are most wise, and cele-
brated by all minds capable of eulogizing their actions. 
0 lndrai yoke thy ~olden-coloured horses. 

S, Sy Gautama. 0 Indra, possessor of wealth, come 
an4 .li~ten to our songs; be not like those who speedily 
depa~. Whenever tholl art ready to enrich us the moon-
plant olterers, and art desirous of sacrifices, yoke thy ~wo 
golden-colour~~ hor..es. 

9. By G«•tai,,fl. The Moon, surro11nded by rays of !ig~, 
Jl)c;l epcircled by the waters, holds jts constant coursi: in th.e 
heavens. Q goideQ-wheeleq lightnings, me,n do not alw~ys 
gaze on you, admiring your speed. 0 heaven and earth, 
hear the praises I ofh!r. 

10. By Ausa.tJ•· 0 twin sons of As'wini, the Rishi who 
celebrates your praise adorns with eucharistic hymn~ your 
,beloved, rain-causing, wealth-conveyini chariot ; the~f~ 
do ye, re~.~d j~yo~ ~y oi,it li41,1on, listeq to l)ly µ1vj,,.,tiqp., , 

a 




l'OURTH DAS' ATI, 

. t . . By JJ'dlsa. 0 Agni1 w~ light the~ lip into a dam~ 
by our praises, till thy sacred wood illuminates the heaven.: 
Bring thy glorious, ibeil:haflstlble ttor~ of prb\1isio~s for out 
praise-cbartling priests. 

· 2. By Vatsil. W~ irivdke thee, 0 Agni;* the inviter at 
the gods, who sittest on the cut Kus' a grass, and art possessed 
cf pure radiance. I invite thee to the spread out Aeat of 
Kus'a grass, to partake of our inebriating llquots in thi!I 
sacrifice. 

3. By V111.ia. May t~ resplendent daughter of the 
Sun arouse us to obtain wealth, as she aroused the king: 
Satyas'rava, of noble lineage, who delighted ia horses. 

4.t Betow on us a go·od and auspicious intellect, along 
with wisdom and food, that we may secure thy friendship ; 
atrd do thou delight in our spirituous liquors, air co'l'ts do irr 
rich pasturage. 

~ We reverentty approach thee for food to support our 
strength; and to obtain good fortune, o· thou mighty one, of 
beautiful aspect; po~sessor of the golden-coioured horse,, 
and who boldest the steel Vajra in both thy hands, 

6'. HI: wlro caiises tlte well-fi1led golden-coloured horses' 
grain-d'ish to glisten, is th'e m'an who wilf stand· in· the first 
place· boefO'l'e thy rain-causing, cow conferring chariot. 0 
Indra,• now toke thy horses. 

7. Dai'ly, in the evening, do we re'Verently a'dore tha't 
Agni, whu, witlt th'e atlacrity that cows an'd ffeet horses in the 
evening come to· tlrei'r homes,· confers upbn' us wealth' . 

. Bring here foo'd for those who cel'ebrate thy praises. 

• 1 t ltave bftn compelled to transllte here an accusative by a YOCa• 
live, on accnullt of the occur,e11a of "1e pronoun (I,,,; 

t The !lame of the Rishi' ii on!), Dllte m,ntionlld' all'et thi1 in tHi' 
Bhahya, whether far l'he reason mentioned· ih· tb• Preface, or lrolil' 

some omiuion in Ille' work, or in 111f copy, t canm,t clltsmin1, 




DAS1ATI V, · 59 
8. Aryam4, Mitra, and Var.r,.a,* gods of the same race, 

do not embrace vilo death.bringing sin, and they utterly ·di,. 
perse our f oe1. , · 

FIFTH' DAS'ATI. 

I, The sweet juice of the Soma goes to lndra, Mitra, 
PusM, and Bhaga. Wherefore, Indra, and all ye gods, 
drinkers of the pressed-moon juice, go to the auspicious 
i;acrifice. 

2, Thou come1ot with alacrity for the reception of our 
sacred viands ; thou slayest 011r malicious foes, and when we 
ijee, thou comest to save us. 

· 3. 0 mighty Soma, t father of the gods, all diffusive aa 
the sea, do thou come to this holy place. 

4. 0 Soma, our purifier, fleet as a horse, come and bestow 
on us ~spicious wealth, 

5. The divine Soma, graceful and wise, was produced in 
the presence of the sacrificial liquids to cause joy and confer 
renown. 
' 6. We ply thee with the pressed moon-plant juice for the 

furtherance of the renowned Brahmanical sacrifice ; for, 0 
hero famed for alacrity, thou art the provider of all kinda of 
food. 

7. Dost thou not know the heroic Maruts, visible in their 
own place of abode, the children of Rudra with splendid 

horses? 
8. 0 Agni, to.day we seek to please thee, the auspiciollfll. 

the heart-delighting, with praises and offerings in the sacrili• 
cial hall, as men by food try to please their horses. 

• These are forms QI the Sun, as also Push4 and Bhaga, mentiocwl 
next Ri.ch, 
. t The moon-plant personified, aid considered as the original ~• , 

and all-pervading spirit, 




. g. 10 Somal1 the prifltly ~halltffl apptdaoh thee-for~ 
with the. alacrity that the swift hQtsts·. of the an•p,eset¥i1t 
god mount the heavens. 

10. 0 rnig,hty Soma, our purifier, come quidtlt to. the• 
famous sweet tibation • Eot thou art the- lord of the- si~rs o~ 
the sacred hyl"IWIS. 

Sll<T!t tJAf>'°A h. 

l, 0 constan.t besto,weu of guts, bring to us riches of al1 
kinds; for this we pray to thee; 0. possessor of a.11 m,gl1t. 

2. 1; t~e s:i:cdflce.sup.e'rmtending ptiest, praii~ the well~ 
ltitowli illustrioas ladta. 

31 The p,iests worship, ln<lra with, hymns bf praise, e:t-. 
tolling him, tha.t he may confer on. them gjits and slay 
their foes. 

4, 0 praised. by m.yriads, the carpenrer* made the: chatiot 
ior thy horsi:s, and the artist god made fou thee the glittering 
thunderbolt. 

5, I ndra, when, his wo»ship, is neglected. neither prov:ides. 
a happy place of abode, nor riches, nor so. much, as permits, 
us to touch fot distribution aD:f part of. his much--desiredi 
treasures. 

6. The• vure, all-sustaining:, divine ra.ys of lighbt remain. 
ever without fault. 

1· Come, 0 lndra, w.ith all thy bands, like the herd, 0£ 
ct>Ws collected in the cow-house. 

8, 0 lndra, we who dw1tJ.I in the hall, where- the sweet) 
j\tlce is placed; satisfy thee with. i.t, and meditate on thy 
wealth. 

9, The priests, with their a116picious incantations,. 
worship Arka ;t and lndra, renowned and ever young, 
receiv,es •~ir praist. 

"' i,f,, Vis'wakarm~. 
, t 'FIie '""'41&, 1111,e 1R111sl•tcd "rays of- litht;" ma, alw-mcan• ,ows,. 

voaa, or walm, t The S1111, 




ro. Sihg • song of ,.._. to the Qge ladra. .ntbjlt re. 
'nowned far slaugtitMlng our foes, and in: ~ ifoNllip. 
you-aN now ~ngaged. 

SIVENTH DAs'ATI, 

r. The eonsulner, the sll:crifice.presehting Agni, knows 
all thidg&1 is indeed the very chariot bf wisdom. 

2. By GciJ/4ya11a. 0 Agnt thou art to us the chief i,F 
the gods1 our aaviour, the conferrer of bliss; tlle subject of 
our highest praises. 

3. Agni, like the Sun with hie variegated tolnrs, posi. 
sesses the jewels of all the earth's mighty ones. 

4, Thou wast, frem the beginning'1 the reciJl>ienti of the 
praise of all, and thou art still, doubtless, the same te tho 
inhabitants of this world; 

S· The goddess of the morn-, of distinguished bitth~• 
acts towards the much-celebrated night as towards a smtet. 

. 6. lit whatever place we provide the materials fot sacri-
fice; there Indra and all the gods present themselves, 

1· As many by-paths meet in the highway, so tet aQ 
riehes meet in thee. 

8. We1 the possessors of heroic sons, destihed to liYe ~ 
hundred winters,* obtain the food placed here by the goid11-· 
a-nd are filli,d with joy. 

g. Tlie Goddess of Water, and Mitra, and Varuiµ1 are, 
making the g-rain to swell ; therefore, 0 lndra, send •• 
plenty of solid fued. 

1-0. lndra- appears glorious· throughout· all the world. 

EIGH'l'H DAS' ATI. 

1. The mighty (lndra), possessed of vast llttthigtb, arttilf 
tire ihreefolcl songs of praise drank to ·his heart's content 

• (11 the ancient Scanclinavilm poems time is al111> rec:licilled by 
riitlits. Wi! Me liltcl 1bit in' tfie tidfe ·of' dltl Nii•, Olfe' fi1111dtid'y'iaii 
rtidiW utn\o1't'dxline'dH111am1 lifli liy,tllifc:lMfdloiH1f,.. ...... 




·ta· 

,rom the vessel. coataining th"l liquor mixed with barley; ,ad 
was well satisfie4 with the p~~ moon.plant juice prepared 
~y the prieslll, When be, mighty hero, had thus been ten. 
dere d iheerful 11,nq fitte4 for the performance of mighty acts, 
lie. s~w t~e huge giant.· Then the faithful divine Soma, an4 
t,be faithful divine lndra, mutually embraced each other •. 
· · ' a. lndra, who watahes over the thousands of human 
l>eing.s, the intelligence of the wise, the all-glorious, the 
performer of many religious acts, the mighty hero, who 
Jcnows the dwelling of the Morn, sends forth the purifying, 
Jife-giving, clear, earth-born waters. 

3. Come, 0 lndra, from a distance to· us, let the pre. 
server of holy men eriaircle our sacrifice, and let the lord of 
Jl'lints act as the king who ,esides in many palaces. We, 
who are e11gaged in the moon-plant sacrifice, call on the 
miglity hero to receiv11 our viands, as sons call on a father to 
.~eceive the food offered to the manes. 

, · 4. I invoke lndra, the possessor of wealth, the ever faith-
ful supporter of holy men, against whom no one can bring 
any accusation. Do thou labour with him who is the 111ost 
liberal bestower of riches, and who is worshipped with songs 
of praise, May the grasper of the thunderbolt smooth all our 
paths for the attainment of wealth. 

5. 0 Agni, whom I now place in thy sacred southem 
recess, hear tl1e sacred consecratory verses. 0 lndra and 
VA.yu, I invoke you two to grant me divine strength, I invoke 
you that you may confer on me new and excellent gifts, since, 
you are the principal ag111ts in the world, who reside every-
where, and fill the vault of heaven : for assuredly all our 
1acrifices ascend into the presence of the gods, as do, the 
qifferent Maruts. 

6. Our intellects, str~ngthened by holy songs, approach 
the mighty VishJ,lu and ihe l\1arudgana ; and with such a mind, 
I, Mal'l!t, c~me for supernatural mig~t, to enable me to olfel' 
,acri&ce, to confer on me happine~s, ancl reader my offerings 




Jifdp1fiou~, and for pbwet td carry on the ._trifice · ( purpos•· 
lo perform. , • • · ·i 

71 The purifying (Agni); encircted by his white radia'nct',, 
along with Ins attendant priests, e~capes from all sin ; arid 
iike t~e Sun, wben; with hlsi aitenda:nt rays, all pure, and t'ed, 
and brilliant, he shines out frdm behind the rainy cloud, th'o\J,· 
with thy seven fiymnirig priests, encirclest all c'reated formr. 

8. i worshi1;1 the god ~~vitA, parent of beaten and eartH; 
who !ldperintetids the sacrifices of th'e' wise, wlto m·a:fce's sacred 
rites to prosper, wHo bestows giftg, is aftogether lo'Vely by 
lhe possession of intelligenc'e, and wbose radiance from ort 
J1igh1 througli the words of the wise, shines at'ound the 
place' of the sacrifi'te, whilst the golden-Handed p'erformef 
bf.merit-conferring deeds proceeds to· the h'eliven of mercy. 

!J. I meditate o·n Agili, the inviter of the gods to' the sa-· 
trifice; the giver of wealth; the son' of sttength, the possessor 
bf wealth, possessed of wisdom equal to· a Brihman,· who goes 
dloit; is a god m'anifesied in the form of the p-rop'itious sacri 
free, the light of the other gods, merry itself, shi1rrl'l'g on a!P 
side~ by m·eans of the brilliant flarrle-causin'g liquid, a!nd the' 
bblatiorr of clarified butter. 
. .ro~ That eitraordin-a:ry feat wa:s thine, d lndra, fhat man~ 
p·reserving deed in form'er times celebrated' in heaven. Thou,• 
with thy divine power, art the glayer of the Asura:s,· thou arf 
{he performer of every p'iO'Us act. Supply us, along with' 
$trength1 with ail thin'g!I suitab1e for mortals. 0 performer' 
bf many sacrifices, suppfy as with food' in' abunda'n'ce. 

[Enid/ the verses in praise of lndra,] 

NiNTH DAS' ATi. 
t What /allow' dh Ii., wmi us«J /or ian11ciafion 6f ,;., liquid,]' 

1, The holy ground daily feceives the saclilicial viiends 
fot thee, (0 Agni, receives) that strengthening, adorable, 
most excellent food. 




,i. 0 So!'AI\, dn thou CGn~uato, for the drlnlting of 1ndMi 
the ptessed moon-plant juice, by the flavouring, ir1ebriati11g1 
llripping pro~ss of distillatioo.t 

3. 0 sprinkler of water1 consecrate the inebriating luice 
for the Marudgana, who sustain all things by their mi~ht. 

,, Cpnsecrate f~r thyself that Inebriating llquor1 whi~h 
i~tislies the gods, and destroys the eulogists of sin. 

$l n~ ma\cet of the sacrifice sends up this threefold 
SJ!pp,licat1on : thel)1 with the eagerness cows low for thejr 
'<;i\lve~, Jpdra come.s with the hoarse-sounding thunder.s .. 

6, C~nsecrate for lr,dra and the h-t1.rudg~na the strongly 
~@tµitin~ tnoon-plant juice, and J will se_;µ myselJ by tlte 
WO!UQt Qf the $hinjng ~ivinity. 

1, He seats hims.elf near the respl1mdent roQJll•p~nts 
uduJouJ!y p11rified with water, wjth the agility that the 
Jnount"hJ-haw~ Je/lt~ himself on his perch. · 

8, 0 lndra, consecrate the spirituous liquor prepared 
by olll' active exertions, for the drinking of the gods, and the 
Marudgana, 1tnd Viyu. 

9. The mountain-produced, pressed moon•plant i~ dis• 
tilling- its juice in the holy place. Thou, 0 Soma, art the 
embroiler of all things in thy drunken frolics.t 

10, The greatly beloved, the heavenly, the learned, the 
wise direct9r of the sacrifice, placed by the rites of conse• 
cration in he~ven and earth, throughout the whole pe~iod 
of his existence, comes to us by means of the pressed moon• 
plant sacrifice. 

• The ~ls~ill~tion here mentin11ed is merelv,a 4rippinf /If i!'I~, No 
h~t is applied.-See Preface, ' 

t "f.he lltlsel in which the liq11or lerme111s, •nd t\le alcoholic part i1 
p.r~c,d, 

i Or when in thy cups, the sust&iner of all thin,~. 




. TENTH DAS1ATI, 

't. The moon-plants distilled by me to procure for us 
toed, and the pressed plants of the rich instituters of these 
sacrificial rites, have gone up to sacrificial banquet. 

:a. 0 Brahm~s, tbe copious supplies of the moon-plant 
futnish us abundance 'Of liquid, as the buffaloes bring to us 
:abundance of wealth. 

3. 0 sender of rain, consecrate the pressed moon-plants1 
tftake us renowned in the world, and utterly slay all that 
bate us. 

4. 0 sender of rain, 0 holy one, thou art closely united 
to the Sun. We invoke thee, thou most bright .eye of 
heaven. 

5. The consecrated, animating, dearly loved, poet-inspir-
ing moon-plant is preparing with the celerity that the 
charioteer gets ready his horses. 

6. The resplendent moon-plant sacrifice, and easily . 
digested viands, the procurers of cows, horses, and heroes, 
are being prepared. 

7. Consecrate the sacrifice, and let the divine !if-pre-
serving, inebriating liquor go onward to Indra, and let it by 
'Oilt solemn rites, ascend to Indra. 

8. The pure, light-produced Vais'wanara (Agni) is wor-
shipped by many various rites, and is expanded on all sides 
like the heavens. 

9. The pressed moon-plants are getting ready for the 
inebriating draught, with many songs ; and the sweet liquor 
distils itself in a continued dripping. 

10. The wise (Soma), borne up by the waves of the 
sea, marches along, and sustains the much-loved preparer of 
the sacrifice. 

9 




PRAPA'THAKA VI, 

FIRST DAS'ATI. 

I. The gods come to the moon-plant~ procured for the 
sacrifice, mixed with water and the produce of the cow, after 
they have been bruised and properly prepared. 

2. The purifying, all-beholding god goes before us in 
all our wars, and (the same divine fires)* render the Brahmai.i 
glorious, through the medium of sacred rites. 

3. All the pressed juices have entered the sacrificial 
cup; the auspicious plants are distilled. The moon-plant 
juice is served up ready for lndra. 

4, , With the speed that chariot-horses are yoked, do 
(our priests) bruise the pressed plants in the holy place, over 
the bull's hide and goat's skin. 

5. The wandering, radiant, ever-moving rays go forward, 
slaying the blackamoor Night. 

6. The sacrifice-produced, inebriating moon-plant juice 
purifies those contaminated by destructive wars. (0 Agni), 
send away far from us the tribe of the ungodly. 

7. Do thou, accepting our offerings, purify with this 
aspersion of sacrificial liquid the waters in the world of 
human beings, as by it thou causcst the Sun to shine. 

8. · Do thou, who suppliedst the renowned Indra 'Yith 
food, to enable him to slay Viitra, also purify the mighty 
waters. 

9. 0 moon-plant, those drenchedt with this thy spark-
ling juice, in their inebriating cups slew the (Rakshasa band, 
in number) ninety times nine. 

10. Bring for us brilliant, enduring wealth; shed down 
on us provisions, with materials for sacrificial food, i.rr this 
holy place. 

• l'he add11io11 " a ploral namt for A~ni, to ai1rcc with Ille verb-, 
t MetophoricollJ; i.e., had freely drunken, 




DAS'ATI II. 

SECOND DASA'TI, 

1. The golden-coloured, far-surveying, ~ender down of 
rain,* the mighty one, he who is our friend, and who js famed 
for' the loudness of his neighing, vies with the Sun in 
brightness. 

2. We desire this day thy presence, (0 Agni,) since 
thou art the nimble divinity, the sucker in of our sac'rificial 
oblations, the preserver, the greatly beloved. 

3. 0 officiating priests, by the operation of the stones 
cause the juice to flow from the pressed moon-plants into 
the holy vessel, and purify it for the drinking of Indra. 

4. That saving moon-plant by its stream of pressed 
sacrificial viands makes us pure. That saving moon-plant 
makes us pure. 

5. 0 Soma, purify our wealth, which is counted by 
thousands, and maintain our heroism. Preserve also our 
supplies of food. 

6. The ancient sages once trod the soil on which men 
now walk, and proJuced the Sun for the purpose· of giving 
light. 

7. Squeeze it out, anJ let the sparkling moon-plant re-
echo from the receiving vessel. Sit down in the Yoni amid 
the liquids. 

8. 0 Soma, rainer (clown of blessings), thou art a ~ril-
Iiant god. 0 god, raint:r (of blessings), thou art served 
by liquid streams. 0 raincr (of blessings), thou acceptest 
the offerings we present. 

9. Purify tht: place where our food is p.repared with the 
streams (of sacred liquid). 0 Indra, descried by the intel-
lectual among men, come hither with thy glory. 

10. O Soma, raint:r (of blessings), purify us with thy 
inebriating stream, purify the lovers of the gods, and those 
who love us, t.rith thy preserving waters. 

• I ndra's horse, 




. PRAIIA"f.HAKA VT, 

rr. 0 mighty inebriatine Soma, by this solemn· rile-
thou art highly exalted, and bedewest (the attendanb 
priests). 

12. This all-surveying, holy, ever-moving, (fire), deposited! 
(in its receptacle with consecratory rites), carries with, it aloft. 
the powerful (moon-plant) liq,.uid. 

13, 0 moon-plant, thou art distilled for our benefit,. 
that thou mayest satisfy the mighty g-0d. It is the juice 
so greatly desired by the gods that sustains us, when it 
is produced (in abundance, sa, as to come) like a wa:ite. 
of the sea. 

14, The moon,plant, with its killing spirit, slays the-
lovers of war for the good of the holy ma.n, and. goes. to the• 
place of preparation. visited by lndra. 

THIRD DAS'ATI'. 

t, 0 Soma, the purifier, who, brooding O'ler the waters,. 
sprinklest . them with thy distillations ; holder of allt 
precious things, golden. fountain-god, sit down. in the sacri~ 
tidal Yoni. 

2. Sprinkle (water, ye priests), all around on the pressed 
moon-plants, which moon-plants furnish the most excellent 
oblation, and which, produced for the benefit of man, has been, 
expressed by the sacrificial stones. 

3. 0 Soma, praised by the resounding sacrificial stones, 
thou art placed on the two goats' skins, like men sitting on a 
seat of two bulls' hides, and the horse Harl* enters aod· takes 
his seat among the vessels of prepared liquid, 

4. 0 Soma, come to. the feast of the gods,. in which. 
the sparkling juice overflows as the sea with the waters ; for 
at thy distilled spirit-receiving vessel thou art inebriating yet 
composing. 

• i,e., lndra's bgrse, 




DAS'ATI tit. 

5- The moon-plant praised in songs by the eucharistic. 
dripping noise of the vessels placed on the goats' skina, comes. 

with the speed of a horse in green drippings,-comes in in, 
ebriating drippings. • 

6. 0 So.ma, I and my friends praise thee. 0 moon-plant. 
daily do I and my friends praise thee. The Rakshasas 
are all about ; save us, leave others, and come within our en, 
closure.* 

7. 0 open.handed-prepared moon-plant, thou expandest 
thy voice through the ocean of juice. 0 purified (Soma), tho11 
dispersest abunda,nce of the moch-desired yellow treasure. 

8. The wise wen, the lovers of the inebriating juice, the 
distillers of the intoxicating moon-plant liquid, purify the 
inebriating spirits in the .de of man over 'the sacred 
receiving-vessel.t 

9, 0 Soma, our p.urifier, enclosed in the vessels whicb 
rest on the two goats' skins, thou art possessed of intelli, 
gence. Do thou prepare for us a sacrifice worthy of the 
Rishi Angiras. 

10. The pressed, inebriating moon-plant juice is being 
purified and strained, and, while it drips by a thousand 
streams, men consecrate it on the goats' skins. 

II. Receiver of provisions, inebriating Soma, do thou, 
who at the first didst reduce the world to form for the benefit 
of the gods, purify us all with the liquid element. 

12. The purifying, inebriating moon-plants, beloved by 
the Marudgana, by lndra, and by his horses, are flowing 
down in a continued dripping, surpassing every thing in 
holiness. 

• The original is Parichi ; i.e., the guardian palas•wood staff which 
is laid outside the sacred enclosure, and which nothing unclean musi 
pass, 

t In the original Samudra, called u&ually tlie Droita Kalas'a. 




PRAPA'THAKA vt. 

FOURT~ ois'ATI, 

1. 0 dripping, purifying divinity, sit down speedily 
among our guests, strain the strengthening liquid. The 
purifiers lead thee, the supplier of nourishment, with cords 
to the place where the sacred grass is spread, as men lead a 
horse. 

ll, The orator-divinity (Soma) narrates the illustrious 
actions of thee as well as S'ukra himself, and he, the per-
former of mighty acts, the brother of the pure, the purifier, 
the assumer of the form of a boar, marches to us on foot, 
singing eucharistic songs. 

3. Agni, the sacrifice-attracting divinity, produced the 
three Vedas, the rite of sacrifice, and the Brahmanical in-
cantations;· and as the cows wiroach the lord of the herd, 
so do the inquisitive, loving intmigences approach the god 
Soma. 

4. The god who passionately desires the sacrifice, the 
purifier, the golden one, and who, along with the gods, 
prepares the liquor and the pressed juice, the singer of 
eucharistic hymns, the inviter of the gods, comes to his 
state of purity with the eagerness the officiating priest goes 
to the house where there is an animal sacrifice. 

5. Soma* is being purified ; he is the father of intelli-
gences, the father of heaven, the father of fire, the father 
of the Sun, the father of lndra, the father even of VishI,1u, 

6. The moon-plant is being sprinkled with waters 
copious as from the sea in the place where are the three daily 
sacrifices, the procurers of rain, the stay of bread, the sup-
port of multitudes,-where are the lovely voices of the 
chanters, and the much-desired gifts. 

7. The great, over-flowing, indestructible sea of moon-
plant juice proceeded forth in the begimiing, creating and 

• Soma, or lhe moon-plant, is here personified and described as the 
Supreme Spir ii, 

• 




0As'A·r1 v. 

producing, all beings. It is the lord of the world, produced on 
the mountain-tops, and dripping near the sacred increase-
causing goats' skins. · 

8. The purifying green-coloured moon-plant juice,· utter• 
ing it9 own praise, rests upon the womb of its water-contain-
l11g receptacle, and, drawn out by men, is prepared for our 
solemnities, and then bringR forth native inteltigencej 'as well 
as sustains bodily vigour. 

9. 0 lndra, that sweet-flavoured moon-plant of thine, 
the drencher of him who drenches tthe earth), is being dis-
tilled into the holy receptacle: it,-the giver of thousands 
as well as the giver of hundreds, the giver of manifold gifts, 
that is stationed on the eternal, food-providing, sacrificial 
grass. 

10. 0 sweet, truth-inspiring liquid, 0 over-shadowing 
Soma, be purified, thou who art produced on the mountains, 
and prepared over the goats' skins ; do thou, most sweet, 
inebriating liquor, of which Indra drinks, descend into the 

sacred receptacle. 

FIFTH OAS' AT!. 

1. 0 Agni, as the brave general, the direr.tor of the 
chariots of war, when he arrives distributes the riches con• 
ferred by heaven, so that his army exults with joy; in like 

manner does the god Soma bring for his friends robes that 

deligbt the beholders. 

2. When, 0 holy Som~, creating· thy sweet liquid 
streams, thou approachest the goat's skin, then, 0 purifying 
spirit, thou, by a new production, sanctifiest the place of the 
waters, and satisfiest the Sun with provisions by thee supplied. 

3, Do ye celebrate the gods in distinguished lays. 0 
Soma, come here to obtain a large store of wealth. Let the 
god Soma, who tastes sweet to holy men, sit down at the 
sacred receptacle of the liquid placed on the goats' skins. 




·, ·11PA'tkAlt(V1.' 
' .. 

, 4. · the loving father : ot h,eaven and ea'rtb comes like .. 1 
chariot;·· bringing provisions, and goes to lndra; making ; 
sharp' the weapons of war1 and holding all riches"·t0; bis 
hands/· · 

5, 1When the enlightener of the mind, the word of the 
Ancient One, the establisher of heaven and earth, first of all 
produced the illustrious venerable lord Soma, he led him to 
the sacred receptacle of inebriating waters. ' 

6. When the firmly-gtasping ten sisters* of our heroes 
afe engaged in squeezing out the purified liquid, the green 
watery juice drips out on all sides from the holders of the 
bow, as the daughter of the Sunt spreads herself abroad 
'on all sides in the sacred vessel, or as fleet, horses (surround 
• city). 

7. As among kings, or among learned men in the assem-
bly of the sages1 or among rustics, emulation is produced ; so 
in this sacrifice, where the covered up liquid is being purified, 
whenever (a similar spirit prevails), I, like the Brahmai;i 
armed with the sacrificial staff, sing verses to procure the in-
crease of our cattle. 

8. The nourishing moon-plant juice is being purified, 
tlte herds of cows slay the Rakshasas, and oppose the enemy. 
Let Soma, united with us, please Indra with his inebriating 
juice, and procure for us abundance of wealth, showing himself 
glorious amid all opposition. 

9. Be sanctified, 0 Soma, by this purifying operation, 
Thou passest bravely through the water on horseback'; thy 
speed is equal to that of the wind, and, like the Rishi Puru• 
me~ha, thou savest men when they fall into sin. 

10, The adorable Soma made that Mighty Essence when 
tbe womb of ocean covered up all the gods : he, the purifier, 
placed in Indra all his might, and the same Soma produced 
the solar radiance. 

• i,t,, the 6ngen, t i,e,1 water, 




bAs'ATI vl. ; 73 

1 t. With the speed of a swift chariot-horse, the ~riest, 
with a fixed mind and one mental effort, prepares the sacri-
fice; the ten sisters purify the attractive juice, which was 
produced on the n1ountai11-top, and prepared on the goats' 
skins in 01:1r houses. 

12. Like as the waves of water follow one another, so do 
the gl!ests who go to the moon-plant banquet, and come up 
to and enter within the venerable radiant enclosure. 

SIXTH OAS'ATl. 

I. Prepare by · beatirtg with stones this victory-con-
ferring viand, with the alacrity mert beat a long-tongued 
dog. 

2. This weaith and prosperity conferring, purifying Soma, 
the lord of all, the soul of the world, irt the person of the Sun, 
enlightens the heaven and the earth. 

3 The pressed, most pleasant, inebriating, holy moon-
plants are being strained : let the spirituous liquor proceeding 
front them ertter the gods. 

3. The brilliant, pressed moon-plants, the riches of the 
earth, friendly and void of any hurtful quality, which are of a 
pleasant taste, and prepare the road to heaven, are now being 
got ready. 

5. Distil for us the substantial viand, desired by hundreds, 
and satisfying thousands ; itself valuable, and possessed of a 
brilliant splendour. 

6. • The Brahma9s, void of malice, ,ing praises before 
the beloved, much-desired presence of Indra, with the affec• 
tion cow-mothers lick their calves in the day they are 
produced. 

7. As the cow exerts all her might in the mur:h-loved 
action of cleanirtg her calf, so does _the purified, carefully 
mixed moon-plant juice make its entrance into the presence 
of the sages, for the promotion of happiness and accurate 
judgment. 

10 




PRAPA'TIIAKA VJ. 

8. The priests are purif 1ing on the goats' !k1ns the 
much-desired, green-coloured Soma, which goes atong with 
the intoxicating liquor, on every side, to alt the gods. 

9. This man desires food, that he may prepare a sacrifice; 
and the priests celebrate the divine praise, with a voice as loud 
as that of a dog driven away hungry from a sacrifice. 

Sl!VENTH DAS' ATI. 

1. In the presence of the beloved names ( of the sacrifi. 
cial· adjuncts), this mighty (moon-plant juice), being placed 
with consecratory rites, is being purified, and rises superior 
to all the rest. This mighty one, the surveyor of all things, 

mounts the swift-going chariot of the mighty Sun. 
2. Let the sounding, well-pressed moon-plant juice, 

which steals the affections of the mighty gods, come to us : 
let it be to us an invigoratin~, delight-inspiring, foe-destroy-
ing lord, and accept our services. 

3. The pleasant juice sounds in the sacred vessel. It is 
like the thunderbolt of lndra, the most brilliant among brilli-
ants. At our sacrifices the graceful, butter-yielding milch-
cows let down their milk.* 

4. The moon-plant enters into union with lndra. The 
friend then does not slay him who is praised by his friend, 
no more than a man slays a young woman. Now the moon-
plant is distilling itself through the strainer into the sacred 
~essel.t 

5. The supporter of the heavens, about to become a 
liquid, the strengthener of the gods, the intoxicator, the green 
fugacious herb, is not prepared in vain by holy men; it pro-
cures food and water. 

• 01 the lovely, gift,confw1ng, water-giving rays of light distil 

showers of rain. 
t Adil tu 1otdel'Stood, 'and by 11s noi6e praising us; lfiertfore Jndra 

will not slay us,' 




DAS' Al'! VU. 75 

6. The distiller of intellect, the brilliant moon-plant, the 
preserver of day, the drawer-out of the ray~ of the morn, 
sounds in the vessel of liquid juice, and enters the breast of 
Indra along with the wise men. 

7. The seven milch-cows* yielded the milk of unconta-
minated, mixed moon-plant juice to the three daily sacrifices, 
in this sacred place, and (Soma) made the four shining worlds 
and their appendages, which we exalt by the performance of 
sacrifices which tend to enlarge the understanding. 

8. 0 Soma, let the pressed, strained, disease-destroying 
moon-plant juice be kept for lndra; let not the Rakshasas 
partake of thy enchanting juice. Let the encircling moon-
plants, arranged on the two skins, be prest"nt w\th us. 

9. The pressed, bloodless, green moon-plant, the distiller 
(of sweet juice), like a king in glittering array, utters his 
voice before the fiery coruscations ; and the purifier comes 
like a hawk to the goats' skins, to squat himself by the liquid 
containing ves~el Yoni. 

10. The inebriating moon-plants, placed on the sacred 
grass, and uttering their proper sound, are now giving out 
their juice before the gods, as the milch-cow does to her 
calf; and the radiance proceeding from the moon-plant up-
holds the intellect, which has been distilled from it. 

21. (Agni), the prestrver of gold, shines, darts his flames, 
surrounds the sacrifice, kindles it, an<l licks up with his sweet 
tongue the swelling mighty ocean, the first of all drams in the 
Soma juice. 

12. O lord of food, thou encirclest the holy, • rich 
(sacrifice): the cool-bodied, disea~eless lord ?iffuses himself 
around the sacrifices, that come from all quarters ; and the 
leafless, far-carried plants distil their essence into the sacred 
vessel. 

• These are metre•, rays, horses, flames of lire, mothers, world,, hells, 

preparations of Soma, seas, lakes, or viUII .1r,. 




PRAPA'THAKA VI, 

EIGHTH DAS'ATI, 

r. These green, pressed, heaven-conducting, deposited, 
prepared moon-plants c-0me into the presence of Indra, the 
giver of rain. 

2, 0 wakeful Soma, go strain the moon-plant for Indra ; 
bring the sparkling, heaven-conducting, invigorating (liquor). 

3. 0 my friends, sit you down, and sing to' obtain the 
favour of the· purifier. Adorn him with your sacrifice, as a 
(mother does her) child. 

4. 0 my friends, do ye celebrate the purifier for his in. 
ebriating quality ; feed him with the rich delicious offerings, 
as a ( mother does her) child. 

5. As the calf twines itself around the life of the cow, so 
dost thou around the flame of the sacrifice ; and all the plea-
sant things of which men have exp,erience are inferior to the 
two-coloured Soma.* 

6. 0 sweet-ffavoured Soma, p.urify by thy might the 
moon-plants for the banquet of the gods with streams of 
liquid : sit down before our sacred vessel. 

7. Soma, the purifier, sanctifies by his juice the goats' 
skins ; and the performer of lhe consecratory rites utters 
his voice where our eucharistic hymns are sung. 

&. Praise is pronounced for the sanctifier, Soma, the 
possessor of intellig('nce ; since our wages fill us with 
wisdom to desire the performance of his worship. 

g. 0 pressed moon, plant, possessor of herds of cows, 
surrounded with horses, all-powerful, the giver of gifts, 
assume thy pure white colour for our benefit, in the presence 
of the produce pf the cow. 

10, Do ye praise, on our account, with all the extent of 
your voice,• your own possessor oi riches. We cover thy white 
flame with the produce of the cow. 

• The two colours are green and yellow ; the former 1hal of the plant 
while growing, and the latter it~ colour when withering. 




DAS'ATI IX. 11 

11. The taker away (of the sin) of the plucker up 'of 
the Soma-Plant) is being p11rified on the goats' skins. Quick-
ly distil wealth for the heroic descendants or' the celebrators 

of thy praise. 
u. The p11rifying Soma is being distilled at the sweet 

dripping vessel ; praise him in the seven metres with the 
words of the Rishis. 

NINTH DAS'ATI, 

1. 0 Soma, purify for lndra the most sweet and richly 
prepared spirituous liquor, the mighty, light.diffusing tiquor. 

2, 0 lord of food, increase our provisions and our mighty 
renown, 0 god, mix the mid-day bowl, beloved by the 
gods. 

3. Prai11e and sprinkle on all sides, as you would do lo a 
horse, the sacrificial moon-plant juice, which procures salva-
tion, r11ns through the world, is diffosed thro11gh water, and 
purified by mixture, with other liquids. 

4, The Soma, who distils spirits, who has a thousand 
drippings, the sprinkler, the sealer of heaven, is the possesso~ 
of all kinds of wealth. 

5. I praise that Soma, who is the bringer of treasures, the 
bringer of riches, the bringer of food, and of brave heroes. 

6. 0 divine (Soma), the bestower of holy future births, 
thou art most heavenly, and art praised for the procuring of 
immortality. 

7. This most inebriating, pressed moon-plant dripping 
juice is being purified by the waters, and is performing its 
frolics like the waves of the sea. 

8. The bulls and cows that have strength to split even a. 
rock, are gathering around the cow-house. 0 Sa,ita, uphold-
er of all things, 'kive us for our portfon the possession of cows 
and horses. 

[End of the cons~ratory · wr;ses.] 







SA'MA VEDA SAMHITA'. 
PART II. 

= -- i3iF -- -







SA'MA VEDA. SA.NHITA', 

PART 11. 

FtRST ADHYA'YA, 

1. 0 my heroes, sing ye before this purified moon-plant 
juice, which is ready to be offered up to the gods. (0 Soma), 
the holy sages are preparing to offer up thy divinity, beloved 
by the gods, along with the sweet produce of the cow, 
tQ the deity (lndra). 0 resplendent deity, do th~u distil 
in purity hilppiness for our cows, happiness for our sons, 
happine1s for our horses, and happiness for our vegetabld 
productions. 

2. the white moon-plant juice, mixed with the produce 
of the cow, is distinguished by its shining radiance and 
ever-sounding dripping stream. The powerful (Soma), 
stiiuulated by the stimulating (songs of praise), and placed 
in his sacred tecess, carries on the (sacrificial) conflict with 
the spirit of brave soldiers entering the field of battle. 0 
all-wise Soma), who by thy heavenly path comest frequently 
to confer on us felicity, do thou, 'f\·ho art mighty in power, 
and the source of all prosperity, cause thy pure waters to 
drip down in our presence. 

3.* 0 all-wise (divinity), source of nourishment, the 
streams of juice which are extracted from thy purified 
essence, ;ind which are desirous of union with the sacrificial 
viands, ,fl!)w down with the celerity of horses just broken 
loose from their trammels.t Our fingers have repeatedly 
manifested a desire to handle the sweet distilled juice, which 

• To be repeated at the till\e J)f 1Wf 91'11Ji111 siaerll(i a~.lutiQns,-Bh, 
t Repeated before lilting the vessol ifRm tl\• gr011nd,-Rh, 

II 




ADHVA1VA I, 

is ~trained clear through the goats' hair strainer into t be 
receiving-vessel. The moon-plant juice descends into the 
liqoi_d-receiving ocean,* the womb of the genuine spirit,t with 
tli~ alacrity that new-calved cows return to their homes. 

4. 0 Agni, when praised, come to our banquet, to for-
ward the offerings to the gods. Sit down, 0 herald, on the 
sacred grass. 0 son of Ailgiras, we make thee grow great 
by offerings of brightly-flaming clarified butter. 0 thou; 
who art ever-young, shine-. forth with all thy radiance. 0 
resplendent divinity, mighty Agni, do thou confer upon us 
abundant, fame-procuring ever-enduring wealth. 

5. 0 Mitra and Varui:ia, performers of merit-procuring 
acts, abundantly refresh with. showers of rain our cattles1 

pasture-land, and with sweet heavenly influences our appoint-
_ed abode (in a future world). 0 performers of holy acts, 
praised by multitudes, extolled in many a sacred flymn by 
numerous melodious voices, ye rule by the greatness of your 
might. 0 ye who were praised by Jamadagni, conferrers of 
_be'nefits in reward of sacrifice, sit down on the sacrificial 
seat (Yoni), and drink the moon-plant juice. 

6. Come, 0 lndra, and drink the moon-plant juice, which 
we have pressed out for thee. Sit down on this our carpd-
ing of sacred grass. Let thy flowing-maned draught-horses 
Harl, which are yoked simply by uttering an ihcantatory 
word,t convey thee into our presence, and do thou listen 
there to our sacred songs. 0 Indra, we Brahmai:is, preparers 
,and offerers of the pressed moon-plant juice, call on thee, 
, the drinker of the beverage, in appropriate hymns of praise. 

7. 0 lndra and Agni, influenced by our songs, come 
from heaven to the splendid moon-plant banquet, and, in-
fluenced by our works,§ drink of the juice. 0 Indra and 

• i e,, the receiving-vessel, 
t Or the seat of the sacrifice ; the original is (Yoni), 
·t So l:lrahma,yuja is here explaintd, 
t Or intellectual attainments, 




ADHVA'VA I. 

Agni, (Som;i.), who (for the purpose of rewarding ·his works) 
is united to the offerer of praise, who is manifested in 1 

sacrifices, and stimulates the senses, is now coming on your ' 
account. Influenced therefore by this our invitation, drink 
this expressed juice. By offering sacrifice, we worship lndra • 
and Agni, who reward the celebrators of their praise. Let'. 
them satiate themselves with this our moon-plant beverage. 
' 8. The origin of thy juice, (0 Soma), is from above; and' 

thy vast stocks of exhilarations and nourishment, though, 
having their seat in heaven, are yet appropriated by the m-, 
habitants of earth. 0 purifier of those who acquire riches, do . 
thou drench with thy juice our lndra and Vam~a along with 
the Maruts. Desirous of procuring thy favour, we worship , 
thee ; for all the requisite materials for sacrifices proceed 
from thee. 

9. 0 Soma, after brooding over the waters, and being 
purified by distillation, thou flowest down. 0 holder of all 
valuable treasures, golden divinity, everlasting fountain of 
waters, thou sittest down on the holy sacrificial Yoni The. 
divine, exhilarating, delight-inspiring,·primeval udder, Soma, 
the purifier, has his seat in the firmament. (U divine Spirit), 
thou art worthy to be called down, and taken hold of ; for 
when thoroughly washed by. the hands of our priests, thou, the 
beholder of all things, distillest thyself as the imparter of 
nourishment. 

10. 0 Soma, sit down quickly on the receiving-vessel, 
and, purified by the priests, distil thyself in the place where 
the sacrificial viands are deposited. The men whose duty it 
is to cleanse thee, lead thee with their rope-shaped fingers 
to the washing, in the place where the sacred grass is strew-
ed, as they would a powerful horse. The god Soma, who is · 
;,.rrayed in splendid armour, and is the slayer of the R.l.k!liha-
s.l.s, is now being purified. He saves from all misfortu11e, is 
the prQtecting father of the gods, possessed of surpas~ing 
might, the supporter of heaven, a.nd upholder of eanh 




ADHYA'Vf\ I, 

The fat-seeing, wise, precedenc~-receiving Ushan~, greatly 
distinguished among men by his poetic lays, obtail)ed 
the concealed milk, treasured up in these beauteous q>ws.* 

11. 0 valiant lndra, with the affection that aewly-talved 
cows low for their calves, do we offer 11p praises to thee, the 
omniscient god, the ruler of all animate, a11d lord of all iooni-
mate creatures. 0 celestial I ndra, there is no one tG be com-
pared with thee either in heaven or in eartbi norre who 
existed in times past, and nohe who shall elCist in times to 
collie. Therefore we, who anKiously desire hones, cows. 
anti provisions,, call oh thee. 

I a. With what oblation, or with what solemn rite, .per-
formed with the utmost sa-cred ilCience, will the ever-increas-
ing,, glorio\19, ,.friendly Indra be moved to favour us with his 
presence? Let (Soma), who among the producers of inebriety 
.is ever faithful, and who among sacrificial viands is to be 
chiefly esteemed, break opent for the11 ;O lndra} the well-
secured trell.sures (of our foes). 0 Indra, preserver of our 
friends wlio celebrate thy praise, thou art ever present for 
protection in a hundred ways. 

13,t (0 {)riests), we praise all tbe day loug that re-
rrowned, foe-destroying lndra of yours, who gets muzy on 
the sacrificial beverage placed in the sacred vessels, with 
voices raised as loud as those of milch-cows lowing for their 
calves. (Indra), we desire of thee quickly to give us food 
of heavenly origin, worthy of being bestowed, encircled with 
majesty as a mountain with clouds, capable of feeding 
multitlldes, worthy of being extolled in hundreds and thou-
sands of different kinds of measure, ancl, united with it, 
abundance of cows. 

• Probably the mellning is, that 'he was the lirst to· extract 11\'e 'iiioOi'l• 
pla111 juie11 from the plaftl51 and produce IJy tncau~ all it !a fcrtlRl'lilcd 
&quor. , 

if h'lli\l!nit/ite, Oft the authority of tht Bh, 
i By V-.dha Msln, in pr•ile of lndr.1, 




ADHVA'VA I, 85 

1,4, 0 ye oppressee priests. who sing the lo11g verse$ 
of the Sa'ma during the moon-plant banqu.et, in prai~ of, 
Jndr.a, who knows the place of riche~, and w™>, to afford 
yo11 ,protection, comes with ms swift horses, I too call .upoa 
him in this sacrifice, as (a dependent calls on l the S11ppotter 
of the famil,y to ,perform what he desi:res. Neither demons, 
nor gods, nor men can overcome Indra of grac-l'ful co,rnte-
nance, who, when he has reverently received the exhilarat-
ing beverage with the sacrificial food, confers distinguish. 
in~ wealth on the sacrificer, who extols him, and celebrates 
b'is praise. 

15. (0 Soma', send down pure, in thy exhilarating 
distillation., the moon-plant juice for Indra's drinking. Som~ 
the slayer of the Rakshasas, the beholder of all thing-s, 
delig-bts to sit on the Yoni, beat upon by the fingers with 
gold nngs, where also the receiving-vessel is placed.* 0 thou 
ric'lrellt possessor of wealtb, do thou become a bountiful 
~tc11rer, 11 mo!rt zealous slayer of foes, -and a transferrer 
df the'Weafth of th1nich among them to 1$. 

r6. 0 Som:.., thou art most pleasant to the taste, the 
evel'y-tt:ady 'pro'Sperer of our rites, the causer o! exhilaration, 
the tniglity one, 'the all~brilliant inebriator; do thou lhen 
strain out thy juice pure for lndra. When we have drunk 
<if t'hee, the'l'I the rainer o'f blessings rains them in abundance. 
When We have drunk or thee, then the beholder df all things, 
the ,god who ilul'pas~es all in intellect, eag-erly ~eizl's ana , 
!Years to us the stored-up p-rovisions (of out foes), like a war-
borse·mhiltg into the battle. 

17. Let these pressed, quickly prepared, green, a11-
surveyiog draughts of moon.plant juice find .an ~MfflftCP, fftte 
the presence of Indra, the rainer of'!blessin,gs. This ellpr~saed 

• Or where (the juioe-expre1Sers) .-e Ra&ed ,on (heir bultadrs. •'Ailt 
Brlihmans whc,,e~form tltese a11ernoni.es m1111.all-•,liind ,c,f a.tttn-
cd cold ring, 




\(D'HYA'YA I, 

moon-plant 1u1ce, necessary to be adored for our protec-
tion in war, is being purified for Indra. Soma· knows that' 
all-conquering Indra as intimately as he is known (by any 
intelligence). When in his cups, Indra seizes his adoraible, 
easily handled bow, and he who warred against the celestial 
serpent* lays hold of his rain-dispensing thunderbolt. 

18. 0 my friends, drive away the long-tongued dog of 
a demon, who would approach the ever-victory-conferring 
sacrificial viands placed beside the exhilarating expressed' 
juice. The moon-plant juice, which in purifying streams.' 
distils itself with the speed of a horse, is now about to• be· 
prepared. Let my heroes address themselves with a ready 
mind to all the rites needful for the sacrifice of the indestroc-
tible Soma. 

19, · The consecrated food is being purified in the pre-
sence of the delight-inspiring, adorable liquids, andi the all. 
powerful Soma is growing great among the waters of heaven ; 
and that mighty god who surveys all things, has mounted · 
the every-where-going chariot of the mighty Sun. The 
tongue of the sacrifice, the orator, the protector of this 
solemn rite, the indestructible (Soma), purifies the exhilarat-
ing, pleasant juice. The son now takes his third name,t 
which his parents did not recognise, but by which he becomes 
illustrious in heaven. The shining juice sounds over the 
sacred vessel, and is confined by men in the yellow-tinged 
receiver. The strainers of the juice for this. solemnity raise 
their voices, where thou, Soma, shinest at the morning 
sacrifice. 

' Or against Vritra, to obtain water, 

t This third name is Soma} ajf. Tt,e first is his own proper name; 
-the second is that of the constellation u■der which he was born ; to these 
is now superadded his priestly name, with the giving of which his pareutJ 

have no right lo i111erlcre, 




ADIIVA1VA I._, 

!JO,· With sacrifice after sacrifice, and hymn after hymh, 
do we extol Agni, who confers upon us prosperity. We 
highly praise him, who is immortal, the parent of wealth, and 
beloved even as a friend. We p.-aise him, the offspring of 
the sacrificial oblations; for he loves us. We present our 
offerings to him who forwards our oblations to the gods, Let 
hi!D be our protector in war, our prosperer, and the preserver 
df our children. 

21. Come, 0 Agni, listen to the divine hymns of praise 
which I, in sincerity, harmoniously utter before thee. Grow 
great by this our moon-plant oblation. Wherever thy spirit is, 
there thou layest hold of the excellent, strength-producing 
offering, and there thou preparest a place for the production 
of the sacred juice. Be thou the preserver of the most un-
skilful among the performers of sacrifice, that they fall not 
into the sin o! destroying thy radiance ; and accept thou of 
their services. 

22. 0 grasper or th,. thunderbolt, we, the offerers of the 
sacred viands, and desirous of preservation, call on thee, 
manifested anew in this sacrifice, as men do on some mighty 
hero. 0 performer of ~acred rites fnr our preservation, 
lndra, ever-young and terrible, seizer (of the enemy), 
may we through thee be rendered secure. We, thy 
friends, worship thee, the lord, the preserver, the adoraMe 
divinity. 

23. 0 thou, who art celt"bratl'd in hymns of praise, we 
approach thee at the present time For all the adorable things 
we wish, with the vivacity travellers exhibit in laving water 
on their fellows. 0 hero, grasper of the thunderbolt, as seas 
are fed by rivers, so do our praises daily magnify thee. The 

\ celebrators of praise offer oblations to the two mighty horses 
Hl\rl, belonging to the fa~t-travelling (lndra), which are joined 

l by an incantatory word to the large yoke of the chariot, are 




Al>HVA1VA I, 

tfie conveyers of fndra (to us), and are acqual11ted with th!' 
roads of heaven. 

SECOND Al>HYA'YA. 

1. Praise ye lndra, the drinker of the juice offered i11 
sacrifices, the sustainer of all things, the performer .of merit-
tonferring works, the bestower of riches on men,* Spl'ak 
the praises of lndra, sacrificed to by multitudes, praised by 
myriads, worthy to be celebrated in songs, famed through 
eternal aies. lndra is indeed the bestower of rich supplies, 
the mover of all things,t the mighty one, who brings into our 
posse,;sion all that is valuable. 

a. 0 my friends1 do ye sing to the moon•plant-juice• 
-drinking lndra, who possesses the two horses Harl, a delight• 
inspiring song. Let our other herot's sing a splendid hymn 
to the conferrer of splendid. gifts, the giver of real wealth. 
0 lndra, givt us food equal to our desires ; performer of 
ma:ny merit-conferring works, give us cattle equal to our de. 
sires ; and give gold equal to our desires ; for it is thou 

; tint appointest our place of abode. 

3. We1 thy friends, who desire thy favour, praise thee 
for that p11rpose in sacred hymns, as the sons of Kal).wa 
were wo-nt to do. 0 holder of the thunderbolt, we praise 
thee, and no other, in this new sacrifice, attended with various-
1riteis ; and thee we also acknowledge in our praises. The 
geds love the imnitutor ol aacdftces; they never allow him-
to become a driveller; they go quickly to his exhilar;1.tin~ 
beveragie. 

• Or reverenced by men. 
t Or bringer of all things, 




,,, M oi' ~ · ifse' l«lh~ fllf" 
iMf~·;tortW~«.,;ti1:tl,tr1~::: .. 
SJ°lig'e1%' 4( 6tf K;'mn1s esto.t't'fae veaera'ii1e· SiJ'rril:' · 
tot!itdlp~ Ji&, t'5at rdd\iarn1~~ ~Y:gt~. .. . .. ·. 
rlsiifes, arid wliom the ,ieveri prfestsi deli~t. F'or ,horn a; 
godiJ'. pt'epa're' the' wisdbm-giving rites in' t~e . 1riiadralca 
sa'crfflce; t'haf trid'rd: our voices·extol. , . 

$- · 6 · r,id~i the puri~ed' moon-planf ji.tidi pt.eel on die 
sacred grass is for tliee j come quickly, and drink if, (j' 
send~t down· of rays,. this consplcuous, adorabf~, expreis'ed:, 
jute~· delights thee·, Destroyer of ~oes, thou art especially.°'.: 
inviteO: O' Sliringa, offspring of° Vfisha,t the liquor w~icli·t'. 
sust.rns th'ee, when quaffed' from the vessels, is that Ofi'' wlilth : ·, 
the mind especially rests. · , · ·· 

6~ 0 fodra, thou art possessed of a large hand'; 'thl'eo''> 
for~ c:to· th'ou with thy riglit hana for us lay hold on accumu- , ' 
lated ri~h·es; such as are worth}' or' being praised, and· worthy; 
of ou'i acceptance. We know thee as the performer of many~; 
religiollS rites, the liberal giver, the wealthy, the most ador•., 
abl~, the god who is accompanied with an all-protective fore1e., 1 
Neitt\er ,Jod' rior man can attempt to oppose thee, more than:· 
one' wo,uid a formidable bull. . .. , 

7. 0' se'nder down of rain, we prepare by pressure Cl~.,I, 
pressea niociri-pfant juice for thy drinking. Partake of the ' 
satisfying exhilarating beverage. Do not slay ignoraht' men'. ' 
who desire' the'e to save them, nor ~end~r t~eni ~~j,:ts Q_{~ 
conte"mpt ; and do riot respect those who' hate the B;~a:iJ:I•::-,, 
Let. the moon~plant juice prepared in our sac~ftc.~1,lll~ 
with the produce of the cow, ,delight thee, so,a11.j:o,iP,~U~,,I! 
for µs/t· eat rifhes. Drink of it as _th~, cte,~ A°'tPf, ~e,i" 
water" 'tlie lake. . 

l: ,lJ\ ~ ., _' /,:JI 

• S.. Preface, 
t Vrilltl WU • .tiahi IJM'Uflf frtm Jndra'• - J '" ' "'""-

'Sh'rJnra, ol1princ' ei' tii. SY11.' . 
Ill~ 




go, ADHVA'VA 1/,. 
U 11', ' , ~ '\ 

·~.f,:., '? l~9ra1 't~.~ gi~e.st, u~ ,,f !pla~J!, ~J?.de,,dJ'in~ to 
tli..r,,,at~ra~tio~ ~i. ?ur.e,p(e~sed nourishing tliqw>rl;O. t(\~~ 
w_h<> a.rt. ips118Cept,1ble . of fe~r from. any qua,l'tf/r •. :i,:e pre~nt, 
it tq ~h~e, The expres•~d juice1 washed by the priests1 an~· 
purj~ed by the stones and goats' hair, become.a clean.~'"· 
hor$e . washed in the river: We, by· mixing the barley~ 
offering· with the produce of the cow, prepare the delicio\l'e' 
beverage, lndra, we invite thee to the feast which has tbe 
a~companiment of the exhilarating liquor. , 

9. 0 lord of riches, this juice, expressed by the might 
our priests, is served up in proper order. 0 recipient of 
praise, drink thou of it. Introduce thy body into the sacri-
ficial viands which Soma is preparing for thee. 0 drinker' 
of the moon-plant juice, let it produce in thee its exhilarating 
effects. Let the moon-plant juice fill thy two sides. Let the 
juice, atcompanied with songs, diffuse itself through thy body, 
and then come to us with both thy arms laden with riches. 

· 10. 0 my friends, ye offerers up of praise, come quickly, 
and sit down, and sing the praises of Indra. During the 
performance of the pressed moon-plant sacrifice, do ye, in 
one body,* (celebrate) lndra, the slayer of hosts of foes, 
and the possessor of much valuable. wealth. Let him be 
present with us, through union to himself, in wealth, and in 
the bestowal of an enlarged understanding.t Let him, with-
out fail, come to us in all kinds of food. 

1 t. 0 my friends, in re-union after re-union, and conflict 
after conflict, in the performance of sacrifice, do we call 
upon the powerful Indra for protection. I call on him in 
regular order, who comes from his ancient abode to be pre. 
sent at many a sacrifice,-on him on whom my father in 
ancient times called. When he hears to-day our invitation1 

. let him come with a thousand auxiliaries, and with stores 
of food, -

• Or in alt'il'natOahds. f Or 'wi~cs: 




ADHYA'VA II, , 91 

12, '.flfuu;ib lndra, in fliis mOOn•planf sacrific~, J!ji~( 
the off~tet·of oblations, a.nd the ce,lebrator of thy'. ~i f<)r 
the·· o_~tairiing of ·still increasing strength ; for thou · irt .thi · 
mig~ty one. ~e · is the extoller of the s~rifice~ in 'h1~ ·. 
highest· heaven, and .also in the assembly of the gods ; be 
cat~es him through every difficulty, he supplies him abun-
dantly with food, he is the conqueror of the ;erial (Riksh~sts) 
powers. I call on the mighty lndra to give us food,. and 
for aid in this engagement.* Let him be very near us in 
the singing of sacred hymns, and, as a friend, promote ·our 
prosperity. 

13. By this hymn l invite Agni, the giver of strength,·.., 
the beloved, the intelligent, the attendant at sacrifices, wllo 
is ma11ifested in propitious rites, the inviter to every sactc<l 
ceremony, the immortal. Let him yoket his all-protecting 
red horses, and, when invoked, let him hasten to bring 
the gods. He is the recipient of praise, (the god) to whom 
sacrifice is offered, and is the performer of meritorious acts ; · 
therefore the wealth of the inhabitants of the world is offered 
to this resplendent divinity. 

14. The gloom-dispelling (morn), daughter of heaven, 
appears, and, becoming mighty, with her brilliant eye dissi-
pates the darkness, and the bearer of blessings ushers in the 
light. The Sun, uniting with her rays, advances and beau-
tifies all the constellations that bespangle the heavens. 
Meanwhile, aided by the solar and lunar light, we assemble 
along with our sacrificial viands. 

15. 0 . radia:nt sons of As'wini, these heaven~desiring 
oblations call on you. I too call on (all) the possessors of, 
merit united to wealth. Do ye then go to every individual 
among them. Do ye,, 0 heroes, lay hold of collected heaps 
of provisions, and send them to the singers of your praise •. 

• It may be in war, or in sacrifice; the wurd means both, 
t Or accompanied by, etc,, radiance, 




?~ 1P~r.~•y,~ 11• 

Stop your ~~a.~t· .~ ~u.t ~~', .'!\d.!{~~~ tl!~:~ ll)'JQn• 
pl~li; .. !~q~or... . ... , . . , . . 
· .•~• ... ~ .. Jc;'ht11~ .~~: '!"lt~ 10~ .t.\~· ~~•~ 
~~~• Jjll!~, ~~~~ for.ms .th~ p.r.i!l.ev~,I, w•ld-1;~. 
rinA\ J!1}s;~ry,ex~n, ~~r ~f ~is P199P..·~.t 'frnf,~%f'•-:'t~ 
(Solt/at 4.1~e tl\e Sun, the •~cywo.r .9f .au .t~.~l}Wf,:,fll-!lf ~t 
t~e t~,irty 1ve~s~ls* ~t ,th~ ,111.i~-day §~~.ri~~e, ,an.d1 Wee,~~~ 
s~ven ')ivfrs! has his source in *.e .hea~~n!, ~ t~e Qm~~ 
Sun, so this Soma is placed aqove all worlds. 

1 17. '1bis · iold~olo~red, b.rilHa~~! ~o~n·p,la.nt j/*~• 
produced: for the · service of the gods by a primeval ~i,11);1, J.f. 
no.w ~elng distilled in tqe holy pi~-~· 'f~i.s .bri~~nt 
(divi~itr); accompanie.d by the in,telle.ctual hymn ; ,thjs s,tg~,, 
u,nited ., fo the institutor of this sacrifice, js carrji~J ~n ,t"}s 
rite to its c.on&Uf!lll)at/on, for the benefit of the g?ds. p 
Solt!a, ,Yl'herever in a ,holy p,lac~ I thy primev~I j~ke i~ b~i~, 
milke'd · · out .and 4istilled, t~ere thou art born pew i.n t~.~ 
presence of the gods. 
. 18. . o· ~urifier: bring our friends ne,.r us, a~? i_n~p!re 

our enemies with fear; confer on us their wealt.h. The Jods 
are com_e ~o the newly-produced, foe-dest.roying, li~l/~d m.o~n-
p)an_t juice. Sing hymns of praises before it, 0 rpy .her?~S. 

r9. · The in'tellect-sh~rpening streams of ll)OO~~p~p~ 
j'uice ~~pair to the receiving waters, as t~e miih,ty ~t~s ,11.o 
to the forests. The ash-coloured, sh/ning juice flows fp_rw,~ 
in a stream for th~ ~.acrific~, procurjng for u~ ,food aqd h.~r~ 
o! cows, Let the pressed mo,on-plant juice ~()W :0.~t f9r 
lndra, VAyu, the Maruts, and Vishyu. 

·~o- 0 brillia,nt So~a, by' mea!1s of pure "'.,ter !J.19~ m 
rendered drinkable at the banq~et of the i~df.1 .~ ~pe ¥~ 
also •i• ~runk (in the for~ of pure 'Y~ter). AtJ~ n~~• fan~~rj~-
ting and ever-wakeful (Soma), in the f,orm of the juice .of the-

. divid~d plant, thou wende~t thy way to the vessel t-hat r~ei'~es. 

• o, for Ll\irly days ; in allusion to lhc thirty Ghllik'-s in a day, 
,1 




93 

t~·.w· .lejl ~ .• ,.~11oh.:W~ed (5ofuai l~t" 
¥ ,-p1·-,.J1l •. :aprinWed,.:atb '.water, ~o~•· ~ ~ 
~•, '11 Jals ·uecl .inovemeilta,. and :(the ·t~,er.,°f,of 
t~·•h~ .. :•• Wlil,•mto' ~ t&ouiutint ~e~1·~ 
t!Jf 1~·-·it1ie.leclt,wl\,!ri,oA urge their chariots (foto 
t~lteld of battle), ' .· · · . 

·11.fJ~ ~~ ,t:iog~~l?-J~, p,isyU~ Qf 11w.eet juice, preaaed 
cJArml ,h, f.ftCri~ce, t~!!~ ,o,nw:.ar_d to procute ioodlt for our 
o~i~.~, p~~t~- ·1r.wY ~~ ~D~ :o.f ,th,e ~µmber .enters aJleek 
of~•~;-~ ~~es ,(~Q\U~) e,n_ter ~e ,n,\n,ds .of a.II (ilia .worsb~ . 
p~_l:f.l i ,wh~~,.~s f .~o.r!le Ja, 1~ ,h.a~ been sprinkled .wiU) w,t.~ 
Of a truth the fingers of Trita Rishi cause the green aoon-
plants t!) flow ~OW!' in juice, fa, th~ f,IF,i1j1ki11g el ~l'f, by 
mean,s of ·the bruising-,stoii,es. · · 

22, With this streai:n, 0 Soma, th~u ':"A9 .c!~jr~ thlt 
presence of the gods, d~<?P down ~o where ,t,1!)!,\JWng Mifopp.-
out the holy piace thou mov~~~ o~ a,11 1i.d~,ll· T~ JJWCJi~ 
desired stream of juice i~ being pro~uc~d1 .~he gold~, 
Soma is being purified; [and w,itp ,cplei;ity ~l~§~J~ ~!}e 
unrighteous, and distils· for the sing-er1,1 ~I ,9r~e ,\~~ (t~ 
which is procured by a band of heroes,] Of t~e nopfish_ing 
s~qiciai liquids {let no marrer of sacred rit~s hear evel) tho 
sound •. ;~~ve away therefor!! eve~y d.o,, ~s 'r~ti~,in, 'ih~ 
solemnity, ,m ,the manner the sons of Bhrigu .beat.'?.~ ~'1~ .. ~PI 
fukkaj. t " . 

{End of the S,cond Ad~J~.r"·) 

, THIRD ~~~1{f.1,f~1 

1. 0 Soma, do tboui who boldest ~e ~~•~ F,t~e ,am9ng 
tbe .gods, purify our sons 'Yith all thy v~ri,~ ~~ ~~ ip iln 
-·-:".'• lw1anii::···" .. , . 

t ~ , t'"' pa111r,1 encloNfl i11 b~c)FI! u, ,~11P, ~ ~If 
•~, 11 w■ntinc' i11 the bat MSS!, ■'!d ~rk~ !!• -~~uWul ~ 

.. ~~••--.,•· U.omitt114,lhelinebetween them muit blJin ,ii/~ •f~r,' 
inatud of 'of.' · 




AOHYA'.VA Ill, 

especial: degree ako,~l .our,,_:red fl~11~1 o,-•of .--an· 
things,,~ ,llllong tbt gods.· when .,u .:_~;~ ~yma~ 
of P,~~,tg,~d,. Cfuse showers of raiUI) di11tilthtmelve$ 
from, hAA,tp,-· 0 th®1 tbo.pmideJt onr everi·n,~~ftit~,' 
all :~~--'-~onds exist for .thy glory. and.for thee tb-eieows\•un 
lt~ ~he m_Uking.pail). ' · ' 1 _ ', 

2, ' ~ pressed Soma, rainer of blessings, distil thy,seif; 
make.us illustrious in the earth, and slay all that hate us.· 0 
Soma, filled with this thy excellent, nourishi11g juice, by thy 
aitl -ft shall aubdue all our foes. By these thy dreaded sharp 
t.oapons, made to slay our foes, do thou save lls from all that 
bate us, 

3,- o' Soma, rainer of blessings, thou art glorious ; 
0 tainer of blessings, brilliant deity, thou art the prodqcer 
of· rain; 0 rainer of blessings, thou art the support of reli-
gious rites., 0 miner of blessings, thy might causes rain, 
thy worship causes rain, thy juice causes rain ; and, 0 rainer 
of blessings; thy person causes rain. Thou, 0 rainer of bless-
ings, makest a noise like that of a horse. 0 Soma, send us 
cows, send us horses ; open to us the door of wealth. 

4. 0 purifying Soma, thou art the rainer of blessings ; 
therefore, we invoke thee, who art all-seeing and all.glorious 
through thy innate radiance. When thou art sprinkled with 
water, and purified by mortals, and received into the sacred 
vessel, · thou (with thy flavour) fillest the whole hall of 
assembly. 0 Soma, who marchest arrayed in thy own armour, 
come here without fail, and, exhibiting thyself pleased, strain 
out pure for us a valiant progeny. 

5,, We earnestly desire the friendship of thee, who dis, 
tillesr thyself in purity, and moistenest the receiving sacred 
vessel,, Thy waves bedew with their current the holy vessel : 
with these, 0 Soma, do thou gladden us:, 0 purifying Soma, 
lord of the uriiverse, do thou bring for us wealth and food, t 
along with a brave progeny. 




.~O,HYlYA Ill. 95 
J. , ,:: ~' t 

Ji. W~ ador.e Agni,, the. herald and inviter ol t~e gods, 
~bo'.,: p~~ pi .U we~~*:W;ho wor~!I glori~y • · '';tlie 
sac~J:;~~!l ,y,bo ~ c:oitti~qlaJJJr .C~ging• -~ .. :· :',' · 
in~i .~iit·,eacre4•. verse, •i by-,·o\ie nuii1~ . ·r, 
as ;~,.l~~ of' tnin-, the. bearer , ~way- ol the' 111trill~ ·and, 
be~~~ by .. the bell~nly ·. hoJts, . , 0. Agni, wlio .art '·p~uced 
by the friction of. two pieces of inflammable wood,· bnus·' the 
godf ~ere to (the priests seated on) the holy cu~grus; for 
thou ~ri the inviter of the gods for us, al)d worthy :of all 
oiir praises. 

'7. We call upon you to the banquet of moon-plant juice, 
Mitra and Var'1,a, who are manifested in our presence, full· 
of holy might. I invoke Mitra and VarurµL, who by their 
faithful word are the prosperers of holy rites, and the lords 
of pure light. Let Varu)Ja he our preserver along with 
Mitra, and be with us for all kinds of protection ; let. th.em,. 
bestow on us all valuable kinds of riches. 

8. The singers praise Indra in the hymns of the S!ma 
Veda; the chanters praise him in those of the Rieb, and 
the priests of the Yajush praise him with their voices. Indra 
is ever accompanied by his two horses, which are yoked by 
the bare word of cotnmand. Indra is armed with a thunder-
bolt,t and is covered with golden ornaments. 0 invincible 
Indra, be present with us, with thy mighty aids, in every 
skirmish, and in every war. Indra, to give light for ever, 
caused the Sun to ascend to heaven, and with his rays to 
irradiate the mountainous world. . 

9. We forward the increase-causing sacrificial food and 
well-finished eucharistic hymns to lndra and Agoi; and, 
along with the oblation, songs that yield the milk of praise. 
Multitudes· of wise men praise them after this mariner, to 
obtain pro~ection ; and those who are engaged in wars do 

• o;. wilddm. 
t TIit Vajr1, bere translated tllunu,bolt, ii a club wi&h a rouml 

,held anned with spikes. 




ad ta ~~ ftJocf. :we; Mlp 11~,,th~· ut~~:6( ~' the 
bear~offfi~ ~et\lltn8f,.a~•~1t'.oul 6~ ~riii~olef 
wilfl'out f'ites tiltlWta. iijo:#fe·tke' ~,~;~f ~i,,:'~f~i •. '' .. · 1,, ,·'~, ·-; :,•·, ... ·.,;.,;:,_'/1;t1:,,,., ,".',.'•" 
off!tiifp;• · . ' · .•,, ,,, , . 

t-Oi., O; 'rime't' o# bleffldgs; :trdvt{ it\ ttlf p11te alrt'aiit(at 
t~ ~Jan~-'v~lifflJJ ;,' &e the dug~ of exlillitii,t11>n to Jndt'a~ 
thl! co1ttpa\uoW of fli'e1 ~a~· at\'d flie' giver Sy' t~j; might' .to· 
ufl• of .if rihrat;le tl'ltngs'. 0 t'llbii, wtio a~ the' puriliert ie 
ca1md tb6'6\· the' su)stainM of hea:verr al'M e'a'rt&; t'b·e. all1-seeiilg~ 
the powerful, to enter our sacrificial viands.* Having fa.id' 
ho'ld1 6f tli'e' g~• riioon'-pfirit witl\· t~bse' your fingers, sehd 
it ®Wll iii' a:· holf strtiim, and send 6ur tri'en•dfnto the wars,f 

t 't, Aw. If red bul1 lows at the s'ight of s;ows, so· dost 
thou ap1roath1 both earth and heaven:; and' as indra's vo~e-
is•' ~rd• h1 the wars; so, bestowing wisd'o1rt, thou· comes€ to 
th'e. plkc:e· where· f1ie' voice of the dripping' is t\eaid. 6 d'eli~ 
dous Soma, that art drunk with the fi'roduce of tlie cow, 
wlreri th~ mingles! thyself with· the sweet juice thou sendest 
forth; tht voice, an1d when sprinkled as the author of' purity, 
thw cauie•t a:-cootiilued- stream to flow for Indra. 0 Soma, 
the ine~riator,, do l!hou strain out pure, info this vessel, for 
our delight', the Water-holding cloud, making tbe distiller of 
rain fr!>m 1 the cl6u'd-pierc:ing stroke o! Indra bend over us. 
Arnt,· 0 &:im-a, wheri sprinkled, do thou assume'thy white 
cot-our, in,d, desiring the produce of our cows, pour in on us 
from a½hidti~. 

12, We, the celebrators o{ thy praise, call upori thee, 
that we ma)' receive food; ou·r (infantry) heroes calt' on 
tMe, 0 brdra, the preserver df holy men, when surround~d 
by our ~ttemies ; irnd1 those who atfi a( tne cavalry statl.on 
calt ou t~e. 0 vetferable Indra., who boldest tlie thunder• 
bolt: itr thy hand, a:nd a~il'm~st the· fotin or lightning, t~ou art· 

• OJ' to ICCOlllpany III in our wars. 
f O'r'iriW our m1ficial'.viallda, 




the mighty one, ~he 'sus~ner 'of the. ~niterse, : hi? · ,ti,&' ia. 
praised, by.I:~, Cive us, .o·:lndni:;· ·cow1, itnd ~-.~f6t· 
chariot1i•~'tllc!'liberalit. tho11 ·~st llll'kiii• bff~·M''. ' 'I gi ; ,:t,)<~j ,.,, 
victorious~ · "·'-f.;. · '. ': 

· rj/'-l)b ye, ·with aJI these eiicetl~nt'·sacti6cial''.viands,., 
since he is known to be a friend of mine, serve lndia;wiio is' 
enconipassed by all valuable thi~gs,* gives valuabte'j•iii in 
thousands, and is bountiful to those that celebrate· bis · praise. 
As a· powerful man goes against a hundred enemies, so 
does Indra go to slay the enemies of the man who _ performs 
sacrifice ; and the gifts of the giver of supplies of food ftow in' 
as waters collecting from the m~untilns. . 

14. 0 holder of the thunderbolt, this very day the heroes 
who fill the sacred vessel supply thee with liquor. 0 lndra, 
listen to me tile offerer of praise, and come here to my home. 
0 handsome-faced lndra, possessor of the two horses Harf, · 
who art the recipient of praise, and greatly celebrated,, we. 
desire thy presence when in thy cups thou art adorned with 
thy wealth, and when at the moon-plant banquet thou art 
surrounded with stores of provisions, of a magnitude to become 
a proverb. 

i5 .. 0 Soma, thy juice is pleasing to the gods; it is the 
slayer of Rakshasas, is exhilarating, superlative, and worthy . 
of becoming nourishment to all men. Do thou purel,: disti~. 
thy essence. Thou didst slay the hostile V:ritra, and daily art 
thou worshipped in the field of battle. Thou also. art the ' 
bestower of cows and horses. Mixed with the produce· of the 
cow, which is accompanied by our eucharistic hymns, d~ 
thou sit down, like a hawk, on the Yoni,t and display thy 
brillia:nee. · · 

" . ,. 

• dr clw,lla in many places. 
t Yoni means a -•• It la in tile Bh4'h.1• IOllletime rendered 

a 11at, It m1111, I infer, either the place whare lh1 llcoholic -nee I• 
1enerated, or when= the juice is exprelllld, 

13 




AllMVA1V A ,Ill. 

:'1 i161 'Uiis!l49table Soma~the i!lO!lrWl~r, th,e;.con(er,e, of 
,~!t#l>: :~~ ~4,; !dr,jri,.:,~q~, . ,Ht: ,i~ ~J~d Gf .all 
c;•m,,,1 P~,:'.e:11l!gh~9,J~~tw~ ,,w9d4t.,;\~,;-~<>v,ed, 
em,,iJoµs voices praise thee, to ,obtain thy el!.hil!U,atinjJ ,~vet-
~} JIPd,tl\e.11DQon-plant iiuce, ~hein purifitd -and -shi,ning, · 
prep~!iJ• ~~ .r9'!l (to t,he object of o.ur desire). ~ng Jbat 
zlo~u, P'1rme,d juice, ,whose sound delights the e.~, by ,w~ich 
w~ .~le \Ve,.I~ lor the five tribes of men. 

I 7, . :Soma, the all-observing, the rai_ner of blessings on 
tJ,e p0$$es~rs of wisdom, is now being purified. He who 
~t~il,l,s t~e succession. of the days, of the dawnings, and of 
the solar movements, wlib moves on the face of the drip-
pii,g ,wiµ;ers, js now causing his voice to be beard in 
~e recejving-vessel, and entering the breast of Indra along 
\YJth. ,our. hymns of praise. By our wise men is purified 
the _ancient, .the wise (Soma), who, whel) pressed by the 
p®,Btf, .drips .down on all sides into the receiving-vessel, 
pr~4ucjng and distilling the sacred, sweet liquor, which makes 
tl;e 'find to blow, and procures the friendship of Indra, lord 
of ~be three worlds. The inebriating Soma, when purified, 
sparkles at the dawn ; and he who receives increase from 
the liquid streams, becomes the sustainer of the world. He, 
wl,i.e~ ~e has (by the priests) milked the twenty-one (cows), 
~i,ti!J the milk beautiful Jo behold, and fitted to enter the 
br~~ pf Indra. 

18. 0 l1Jdra, since thou undoubtedly art heroic, powerful, 
and unflill!lhing, thy intellectual qualities are to be adored 
by all. 0 possessor of manifold riches, let wealth be 
po,~j!ssi:d py him who 1by sacrifice) sustains the gods; and 
afterwards, 0 Indra, favour us with thy society. 0 lord 
of food, who ei,joyest perfect ease, who resemblest a Btth-
'in~;* show thys~lf always kind to us, by delighting th1·self 
in drinking ,our expressed moon-plant juice; mixed with the 
produce of th~ cow. 

• i,,,, one in1en1 QO lh1 Hrvice of Iha doily, 




•!J• :·Alf ·out snngl'' <If' pl'ldse ::fall -ii\'· shhrt!i.t"bb"I~· 
wh<:> 1ilfl~,~ent)* th1rinfM ft'pelt ~· dh~llit• 
Iord''f/~iifaib'tifi ah'd protector' df hl1tt nte,i >,·Oi~~ 
lord ~($U.'e~gtli;"let<not the off~rs of saerttt·fob,ftbl7a,m 
thy . fnetrdahip be afraid. W-e· especially adore . theft tlies 
vicWrfbdll and invincible. The many forttter<gifts"of liia-tlli 
ancl 1 tli~; protection he affords us, are not· deapised~1' 11$} 
when our host confers wealth, with food-supplying cofl, oif 
the singers of eucharistic hymns. 

FOURTH ADHVA'VA, 

1. These drops of moon-plant juice obliquely ni~yhig 
to their purified state,t and quickly giving birth to all d••ir~ 
able things, are being prepared for use. These powerful 
moon-plants destroy many sins, and procure for our son~ 
valuable presents, an'd for ourselves troops of cavalry. They 
produce riches and cows and food for gifts to us, and run to 
listen to our eucharistic hymns. · 

2. The resplendent Soma, the purifier, duri~g the sal:ri: 
fices performed by men, marches through the air, ~ccom-
panied by the hymns of the wise. 0 Soma, who art famed 
for' supplying food for the gods, do thou bring for u~ that 
strength which is united with quickness of movement, ;i.nd 
a form which shall confer on us dignity. (j thou, who sh~nest 
brightly, bring to us for our protection the riches of hu~dreds 
of cows, stores of provisions, troops of noble horse,.d 
wealth· to make us respected. . ,. 

3. To enable us to perform properly our sacreiriifs, 
we supplicate thee, who dwellest in the regionp .. of 'the 
mighty ·lieavan, art possessed of all riches,· and· ever · auspid-
ous.j ,the 'tutter in pieces of the powerful, the highly extolled, 
the performer of mighty works, the inebriator, the destroyer 

• Ot'thellU, 
t i,t,1 moving through the goat's-hair strainer, 




ADHYK.V..\ tV, 

. ~f bun(lreds. of . citi.118, 0 ., ~do~er, · of merit-con~rring 
· ,-,orb., ~Jh.e:¥wk:, i~ng _to:'~ .f.~Jp~~/~s,·9.ll 

cJuzUag:: ·. a~i,l .. impe~•~~ble _ wealth. Aftenr!i~,ptl~·into 
it thy: spirit; rise to superior might, 0 tho1r1 'best())iwer' ~f the 
N~:''.i:,f: .our desire, and o~rver of all ~n •. Aad ii.t,.the 
biri)1,~rk\i·witbout fail tile sender o( rain, the guardla...:,,of 
'eacriltte,'wbo ba.11 been ordained for the common benent of.all 
the~' 

4 .. -· 0 Soma, when purified by the wise priests, sanctify our 
food by thy drippings, and, bringing health-conferring provi-
sions, come to our cows. 0 much-praised, white-coloured 
Soma, when in the course of preparation thou art strained 
fo~ pure, and goest to mingle with the produce of the cow, 
do tltou prepare wealth and food for the people. Shining 
b_~ides the sacrificial viands; do thou who art ordained for 
the 'benefit of mankind, and purified for• the banquet of the 
godii,'•come to the place prepared for Indra. (The household) 
Agni, joined with (the oblation-receiving) Agni, the wise, the 
preserver of families, the ever-young, the drawer in of the 
sacrifice, the spoon-mouthed, shines forth. 0 divine Agni, 
the institutor of the sacrifice worships thee, the herald of the 
gods: do thou prove his especial protector. Whatever insti-
tutor :o_f a sacrifice sits down in the presence of Agni to pre-
pare the banquet of the gods, do thou, our purifier, confer on 
him happiness. 

J· I invoke Mitra, possessed of holy might, and Var11:r;i,a, 
the"destroyer of our foes ; for they two furnish a supply of 
water by the act of raining. Bringing without fail the 
rewards of the sacrifice, 0 Mitra and Varu\18,, the m-
ere.sets of water,* the . senders down of rain, you diffuse 
your~,}ves throughout the sacrifice, complete in all its 
parts. 

• Or truth ; or sacrifice, 




ADHYAiYA IV, IOI 

' ( "' j 
. 6. Mitra and V~ ~flag'el prod~ce4 for t~.e ·~nefit 
?f ~iid;: 0they have a 'wide''•~tace. ~r~e(~t~ 
mcreas& olir .trength, and further our' sacred rttel ·p .... · . . 

. : , ,,'' ~;,•)t\•?-~}1 .. ,ff:i~.i~ 

· 1· The bands of Maruts, advancing with the f~~le.-
Indra, burst upon our view. Both ~e and they exult ,ff!th jqy, 
and are arrayed in equal splendour. ··they, year ~y, .Year, 
.without fail, impregnating the clouds, send _us rain, and have 
obtained the title of worthy of a share in the sacrifice. · With 
the breaking, tearing Maruts, thou, 0 Indra, didst entcir the 

I • 
stronghold, and bring forth the cows which had been shut up 
in the cave.* · 

8, 0 lndra and Agni, I supplicate you ; for by yo11 thjs 
whole world was formed, according to the hymns Qf the 
sages: you will not destroy. me your worshipper. Ffe,rc;e, 
and the annihilators of our foes, 0 Indra and Agni, W\µ!Voke 
you; do ye have pity upon us in our present difficulty. 0 
preserver of holy men, through means of the virtuous perform. 
ers of sacrifice, slay our foes, slay the slaves that rise. agaiast 
us, utterly slay all that hate us. 

9, The flowing drops of moon-plant juice distil in purity 
their inebriating, delight-inspiring essence : and with these 
the exhilarating juices that distil delight, and brighten up the 
understanding, flow down above the receiving-vessel in the 
holy place. The purifier, the shining, the resplendent (Soma), 
the grand reality, is sent with speed in a stream into the re-
ceiving-vessel ; and the grand reality goes to Jay bold on 
Mitra and Varu:i;ia. He who is pressed by men, is the object 
of desire, the all-seeing, the resplendent king, produced in the 
heavens, is being prepared. · 

_.o. The drawer together qt materials for the sacrifice 
cau~ the hymns of the three Vfdits to be sung, the hymns 

• The cows of the gods were stolen by the Pan I ( metchaat) Alunl, 
and rescued by lndra, Tile whole story is evidently the same u Chat of 
tlle Grecian Hercules, Sec Rich vu, Anuvaka, 3rd Sukta. 




103 Ai>ftYl\1V4' IV. 
: ' • • < • • ,- ' • ,\t;, ,,t ' • a I 

that ~~WnJ~, ~'r(f~;'~~ 4i~o,~ t~:jl}ruiti~ of 
the a»~¥111J goct~ , ~nd as c~ws w,he~ .~11lle4':,..,_tJo 
the ~•-oUhe herd; SQ do the minds, th$t desireli4j,pµiess; 
to s._ 1. n.·.milch~cows· are desirous of the. moott,plaiil:I; 
Tbtt.Bfattma,a, by · their learned hymns ask-ttie moon-~~t 
juic6.. :\T:Jie pressed 'moon-plant juice is being distilled'liud 

. straim!d; and our Trishtup verses mingle with·the moon-ptatrt. 
juice. 0 ' Soma, who art sprinkled and purified · in these 
1esselr, do thou purely distil for us happiness anti· peace: 
Enter thou into Indra with thy exhilarating might, increase 
the glory of the holy word, and produce in us enlargement 
oHntellect; 

· rb •O,Indra, though there were a hundred heavens, they 
would inot ·emit a brilliance like thine, nor could a hundred 
eartbsi, no,. nat even a thousand suns nor the whole of'the 
creatures,in the two worlds, (emit), 0 holder of the• thunder-
b'olt1< a, (brilliance equal to thine). 0 rainer down of·bless• 
iogs,:all-powerful lndra, thou suppliest us with every heaven• 
descended faculty in vast abundance. 0 possessor of riches, 
and. ·holder. of the thunderbolt, save us by thy mighty aids, 
while defending ou~ cow-pens . 
.,,: uv O · slayer of Vritra, we flow together like the·drops 
of :pressed moon-plant juice, where they drop down in the 
holy placei wbile the chanters, seated all around on the cut 
sacrifibial, grass, wait on thee. 0 fixer of our place of· abode, 
the iin~rs celebrate thee when thou minglest with the moon~ 

, plant, juice. Whenever thou thirstest for •moon-plant juice, ... . 
cotne -to th11 ,pia-ce, and listen, when approaching,· to our 
beseeching cry, emitted with the constancy of perpetually 
soundmg beings. 0 sustaiw of all ·things, thou ·givest to 
tae,,de$cendants of Ka:q.wa a>thousand·portions of nourbhiiig 

Jood.-, Ogiver of. riches, survey-0rof- the univcrset atpresent 
we,desir410f.,,tbee sustenance in the form_ of gold and co~. 

-----------------...-,-,·-
•o, Brahme, 




ADHVA1Vil- ilV, 

' \ 1a, _ He who actively engages in hymns of praiie •~btams • 
faod,, ·•~,.?u~n- with :~". :eh1airged -1Hfdfflt!lia~g-' 'I !pralae 
w.itlt(jfi: 1:olce- your mucbae!'tolledlndra,s-witll ttll~ 1 
the,/Cii¥~ntet bends the p$.nt metal ring- ,rjjund-tllii:1•.it 
The :careless chanter is not extolled among- the prnf • 
~. nor do riches flow in on the impious negledtere :'(Jf the , 
p•li ,of the rich ; but, 0 possessor of -riches, wealth -it -
given to me, who on lucky days sing the hytnnir ·:with • 
gracefulness. - , 

14. T½ie priests utter the hymns of the three V6d4f-•witll 
the affection milch-cows call uptm their calves, and the drops 
of moon-plant juice proceed downwards with a resounding 
noise. The Brahmanical, mighty, sacrifice-accompanying 
hymns celebrate Soma, tl.te child of heaven. 0 Soma, cause 
to flow in to us the wealth of the four seas, and ailso thbll-
sands of treasures from every side. -1 

15. 0 Soma, the pleasant, sweet, exhilarating moon-
plant juice is being purified, and drips down. Let your ·ex,. 
hilarating juice enter the gods. The Brlihma11 gods have 
said that lndu (the moon-plant juice) is distilled for lndm. 
(Soma), the lord of speech, the lord of all might, is·being 
worshipped. Soma, the possessor of a thousand strtams · 
which flow together, the inspirer of the sacred songs, the 
lord of rich men, the friend of Indra, is being distilled to-
day. ', -'~ 1 -

r6. (0 Soma), lord of incantations, thy holy essen~·is 
every where shed abroad. 0 author of being, thou·encoVn• 
p~sest every member of our body all around; The-men 
devoid of fervour, and imperfectly instructedt, in religious 
tbbigs, cannot embrace thy essence ; but the sacrifi'cers, who 
are like thoroughly baked brtad, do embrace it. 0 · Soma, 
bun\1!1'. up of our foes, thy essence i~ spread over tire heaven!~ 

• There-ii a play Oil tu word t 1\1111111 'which IIIOII .. i,u, pd ,,.i. 
t Litw,ll.,, raw, 

• 




ADH'l A"U, IV. 

. region, and_ its s~i~)ng partU~tJ~J~ry4 aep,r,a,tety to view, 
a11d, 1 q?i~~ly .. ~w~~e.~,f¥"~Ft;~ ~R~,~~, 

, the~~ff!,b[J, ,,,_, • ~F·. l;!J;,~~' ~ll~~i~);, 
in t!.w~,, ,t)le lrio~ing,.S~·ine~,fort~; }~~~1;d••i 
of ~ ~t:'lds; t~. sprinkler ofi wat~r. si,~werii it d,om,;#11\ 
the·-: It was through hi, wisdom tha,t tJie, "~"' 
po~~~-~,f8'~4J,performed the act of creatio~,. a~d'the ~e1t 
•~~g.,pJ!,triarchs established the race of .man, · . •, 

17. 0 ye chanters, do ye sing to Agni, the giver of gift,, 
the ~tend.,nt on sacrifices, the mighty 011e, who is possessed 
of a p11re radiance. Agni, the wealthy, the possesso~ o( 
brilliaqce,, the recipient of sacrifices, bestows fame-procur• 
ing provisions in union with progeny. Let the amiable mind 
of a god like him, worthy of our i,ociety, come into· our 
presence with supplies of food and abundance of water. 

J8, • Indra, holder of the thunderbolt, we laud that joy• 
producing juice of thine, the causer of rain, the subduer of 
armies,, the former of worlds, and which is adored by thy 
gold.;coll)ured horses ; by which also thou didst extend thy 
light.to Manu, the son of Urvas'I, and, rejoicing in this sacri-
fice, di•playest thy radiance. The singers, as on former 
occasions, celebrate in alternate lays that essence of thine. 
Do . tl;iou subdue, day by day, the waters, which are the 
sourc~ of rain. 

19, 0 lndra, hear the invocations of Toras'chi, who 
performs thy solemn service. Satisfy him with the treasure 
of, a . valiant. progeny, and abundance of cows ; for thou art , 
magnan_imous. To him who produces the new exhilarating 
'!1ong,. ,do, th9u impart an all-sagacious understanding, of t~e 
true ancient stamp, and- continually increasing. We pra,ise. 
thatj~~ wbom our voices and the sacr.ed hym11s eito! i . 
and,, ~UII, of worshippiag ~is great might,, we f~I down 
in ad9~u,~~~fpr~ him: . . , ~ . ". . 

, , :. , IE'fd of Ill, fourtk .Ad~1l111,l., 




ADHYA'YA V. 105 

FIFTH ADHYA'YA. 

1. 0 purifying. Soma, the all~pervading, \)etoved'1 h~~en• 
desc~d~ed, ndlky, streams of iui~e are_ bein,: p~duc~ ~~-~ ,, 
recel♦ibg-vessel; and the.creative pnests punfy .thee; ,so t1ait ·. 
thy 1-rge drops fall down through mid-,Jr, 0 tho11 who'iit:' 
the portion of the Rishis. The life-preserving streams of the• 
unchangeable purifier proceed in all directions to both the 
worlds, when the green plant is purified in the holy place1 
and sit on the receiving-vessel over th; spirit-generating 
womb. · 0 beholder of all things, the mighty beams of thee, 
the ever-Increasing, proceed on all sides to the universal' 
mansion, (the bodies of the gods) ; whilst thou, o· all-per- ' 
vading Soma, art in thy indestructible juice poured forth pure, 
and reignest supreme over every day. 

i. The purifier, sprung from heaven, all-wondrous like i 
flash of lightning, appears in a mighty flame called Vais'w4-
nara (the friend of all men). 0 brilliant purifier, t~El R4-
kshasa-dispelling, inebriating essence of thy juice is flowing . 
down purified through the goat's-hair strainer, The happi-
ness-conferring, shining juice of thee, our putjjier, displays 
its splendour; and thou, the seer of all things, spreadest thy 
light all abroad. 

3. As cows cheerfully go (to the cow-house), so do these 
quick-moving, shining, ever-advancing moon-plants, stript 
of their black skins, (go to their place). We praise the 
R!kshasa-restraining, difficultly-obtained, enduring, inebria-
tion-generating, bark-divested stalks of the present excellent 
moon-p'lants. The voice of the mighty purifier is beard de-
scending Uke a shower of rain, and bis rays shine in the 
heavens. 0 Soma, strain out pure for us abundllnce of food, 
joined with abundance of cows, of gold, of horses, and 
heroic sons. Do thou, 0 beholder of all things, distil out 
pure for us thy juice, and satisfy the two extended worlds, 
as the Sun by bis rays distils the morning. 0 Soma, do thou 

\ I 

14 




1o6 ADJWA'VA V. 

~:ith thy golden streams encompass us on all sides, as tha 
earth is encomp!l5eed on all •ides-with :water; . ·i ' · · · 

· +.•; tO . Soma¼ -po~tecr•':'Ot •aii .- ,eni~'itibid, '-~~~g _ii.a. 
su~lthy1 bodyi hltfo,ed bx the':gods;;go-6tr<at1'-'•ti~/~ng, 
"'.(~p):'wh'"ver the gods are.'' · Consecrattng1tli~ uncinse, 
ci~~"•'lld providing food for the people, s~rid dow'b'1ah~e;s 
of,riin~ftom hea.ven. He who. moves With sptecftii '"the 
high~{ heavens, distils Aoods of water while s~ated· i~1.ibe 
holy place. When pressed, thou ·comest 'quickly 'int;::thy 
holt- state,- accompanied with thy might, possessed ofn.di, 
anc~j" se~ing all things, and enlightening (the gods). When 
pressed, whether near or at a distance, (Soma) enveloping 
protects us; ·The honeyed Soma is being strained° out pure 
for lndra1s drinking. · 

5.· The every-where-going sister-consorts (the fingers), 
desirous of the mighty work ( of bruising the plants), thrust 
(under the stones the magnanimous lord, the mighty (moon. 
plant) lndu. 0 purified divinity, who shinest with ray after 
ray, when pressed for the gods, do thou bring among us all thy 
treasures, 0 purifier, pour down on us rain worthy of our 
praises, to enable us to serve the goris ;* and let it come 
gathering around us, to provide for us food, 

6. The preserver of men, the ever-watchful Agni, the 
posseseor of wonderful might, was produced to cause pros-
perit~ anew to the worshippers ; and the pure and shining 
god;··,iighted up by the priests with clarified butt~r, shines 
with an intense heaven-embracing flame. 0 Agni, Angiras 
Rishi found thee out when concealed as in a cave under .the 
cover of every tree in the forest, and thou camest forth on 
being• churned by his mighty strength. Hence, 0 emitter 
of heat, thou hast been called the Son of streiigth. ., '.J:'lie 
prie~'t•t ~a.use thee, Agni, the, lighter up of the sacrifi~e; ~~e 
first,b\rn .. who of old wast placed in ~hy sacred r~cess, _and 
travel.h1s(with thy c)lariot ihhe same line with Indra_ and tbe 

• Or oiler up our ·•how~rs of adoring pr1iH1 I~· the 1od1, 




ADHVA'VA V. 107 

, , .~ , 4 , , ~ ; J: , f, ·' • , ' - , •1 ' 

gods, to shme f~~~~:in, the gupbful):1sseml)ly, Jet.then tAglli), 
the ~r,~~ ~.~if~~, god~,. 11,nd, the'.pr9,~re(:of.~~".'feN,~~9 
acts,~~~~~-~9 ~~e. (ia(:red.gr~s, to,,'pa.~e ,ot~~~,,~~~~f 
· ,.1:i:~9 :~,~~ .a~d Va,uiµ, prosperers of sacrifi~•al :t.l~ 
the~.,,!'l~op~plants have been pressed for you; therefore in• 
this sa:crifice .~e!lr my invocation. 0 possessors of radiance, 
witho:u~ ,hate; immoveable, most excellent, who ente~ the, hllll 
of ,ass.~mbly, ~bich has a thousand supporting pillar5i :(c~,ne, 
hither). · They two, the universal monarchs, whose food .is 
melted butt.er and moon.plant juice, sons of Aditi, the givers 
of wealth, serve the guileless (performers of sacrifice). . 

8. · lndra, ~ho utters not a word against his worshippers, 
slew with the bones of the Rishi Dadh!cha ninety times nine 
of his foes. Desirous of the Rishi's horse-head, which had 
its locality among t}i, mountains, he there discovered it in a 
lake.* When the time of the departure of the ever-moving 
Sun arrives, the light proceeds to take up its abode ig the 
ornsion of the moon. 

9. This copious song of praise was produced by the 
hymning (Vas'ishtha) for you, 0 Indra and Agni, and falls 
thick as the showers of rain from heaven. 0 Indra and 
Agni, do ye two hear the invocation of the chanter, 11nd 
accept of his praises. 0 ye our rulers, give us the full re-
ward of our religious services. 0 ye heroes, lndra and Agni, 
do not give us over to disgrace, nor to be the song of our. 
enemies, nor to reproach. 

• The Rishi here mentioned, accordinr to the Bhashya, hacl lieffl 
taught the Kaflacha-Vidya (all-protective science), with a thrfaleninr.-' if 
he revealed it to any one, that he should have his head cut off,, Weatied 
by the entreaties of the Aswinf Kuma., its he revealed itJ~ them, and 
suffered the threatened punishment. Thef, however, got a horse's 
head, ancf clapped it on his shoulders intead of his own. Wh1n the 
Rak,haui became rampant, l,,dra had to· entre~t this .fishi to lay 
down hi•·· life, that the bones of hi5 new hud might furnish weapons, 

the only ones by which his foes could be defeated. So dangerous is it 
even for a god to kill a Sage ! 




ADHYA'YA V. 

, .. 10. , Q remqver of . sin, .. twu who art the 1qpplier of 
strength, aii~.~ ~,,~t~, ,~ ~-~jiq~ pure\ior' tire 
gods,;.~~•k,,t ~iildng,, ~n~ tor·~:~~~~JcifV4lu. 
SolD'-. ehineii brilliantly among the gl><J~· ~-~~•ij(ddf~n 
~r1'.01Ji, .as the. rainer dpw'n of felicity, tl,bt~.utv·~f 
eaipp1' ~~ ~loved one, ,'Yho uoilergo,es the_ p~ "•ef 
pwibtioft,,~ is in~apable o.f sustaining inj11r1, 0 ~hjftt 
(JI· pq~n, tllou who art laid hold of during the·-~ af 
straining t1iee, and who proceedest with a .resounding t1olse, 
enter into the sacred Yoni : through means of this ~remony 
enter the air-generating vessel. · 

H, · 0 dripping Soma, day after day I long for thy 
friendship. 0 grl\Y-coloured god, many R~kshas4s run in 
~pon me.; do thou annihilate them all. To obtain thy 
friendship, 0 gray-coloured Soma, who distillest thy juice 
when pressed· by day, and by night, do we bring here thy 
breasls (in bundles of the twigs), and we approach thee shin-
ing with a radiance surpassing that of the Sun, as the eagle 
tribes{approach the luminary of day). f 

u. The purifier, the far-seeing Soma, who destroys all 
our murderous foes, the possessor of vast intelligence, our 
priests render glorious by their sacrificial rites. When he 
goes to his seat,* then Indra, the rainer of blessings, goes 
t.o drink the pressed juice, and afterwards departs for the 
immoveable abode (of the gods). 0 dripping Soma, showe~ 
down to ps great wealth, such as is coveted by thousands, 
and bas been collected from every quarter of the world. 

13. 0 fodra, drink the moon-plant juice; let that exhila-
r:a~ tbee, 0 possessor of the horses Harf, which the bruising-
~tone. pruses out by means of the arms of the juice-expres-
sing priests, who lay tight hold on thee, as a man does on a 
horse, -0 lndra, possessor of the horses named Harf, let the 
intoncat.ing, sparkling liquor, which is thy du<:, and by which 

• The origfoal is Voni, "1he womb where the spirit is generat.ed ;" 
but the Bhashya renders it generally "seat," 




AU,QT/1 TI\ •• 

t\1ou ~Ja1est Qur foes, pl.eM11ral>ly ~t.e tlie.e, t~ po.g.~iq, 
qf w.sHr13/':~r,_s;,. O_po~~~~f ~f.,ciq~e~ I, Yaa~Wltba:, :,~J~ 
bra~ .. ~iia.~n,g, .. w~ic~~~P#t-~~ JI!~:~ ,.\~o~;,f~ 
re~ "~ept. of. t,he~e. ;aAc.rw,cW' viaM, 6xU+·:~,ij,a 
this liai;nfice: .. . ••· . :' ·;,: ,. ,,l);/1?/fi'lt:' 

r,i. :-: p~~ '.h~roes. in one united band 'are re~~ri~:b• 
a_n~, Atid 'brin~~ !nto v1ew1 to rend~r wi .JlQPiou~. at)d '.be, .. 
tow. upon us imperishable riche11, such as to ~c:i~fer on ·~on 
renown when they bave ,performed · sacrifice~ 'lltdl'.ll,,., tlJ,e 
subau.er of hostile armies, the slayer of foes, t~ at~, tb,e 
mighty, the ancient, the fleet. The Brihm~, as .so.on . 8!i 
they see the all-embracing lndra, who ass~med t~ form ot 
a ram, fall down before him, that they may ce.le'brate hill 
praise. Do ye, glorious chanters, who are devoid of ma1iee, 
and ever eager for sacred song, shout toiether prai~ ~to 
the ear of Indra, in t_he words of the sacred hymn•. .The 
singers unite to celebrate lndra, that he may come to the 
moon-plant banquet, when the lord of heaven, the. su,tain!'l' 

·of sacred rites, for the prosperity of his worshippers, come.s In 
his 'might, and with his aids. 

15. I praise that Indra who is the 'king of -men, who 
journeys in a chariot which never varies from its course, who 
is the saviour of all our armies, the primeval divinity, and ·the 
slayer of Vritra. 0 Purohanma, in whose substance a doubfe 
quality resides,* for thy own preservation, render thy 'lndra 
glorious ; since he is the holder of the thunderbolt, worfhy 
of being reverently approached, mighty and radiant like 'the 
Sun. 

16. The wise Soma, who is bruised between the- two 
planks, and is famed for the performance of sacred rite~, pro-
ceeds with a fleetness surpassing the most famous birds, 
along with the performers of the sacrifice. Soma enlightens 
(the heaven and the earth), the mighty son, the mighty mother, 

• i.,., preservat.ion for friends, and destruction for foes, 




/Ill 
• 1111n111 ~n ·r, 

thtipure ollspring, tbe parent,,th_e prospe~er. bf tbe u~rilice. 
Thou, ~~ma, •1, •. ~~~;e!l~9f Jq~1~,.,i,•'!f!~,;fte•~an 
who. lltlei 'in a pface;vofcf of. m~ife!·•n1 1Vb~ ,i9.~~~~ ! 
come· tbet'~oreto •our $Ollp oJ. prat-. _; 

1 ':i 11 !'\ ' : ),~- ~ , ,. / ·,' '\ 

1~/;.-n.ou, () dMne .purifier; ~a'.rt the -most _,nllmuf'o( 
~~$1)/p~~e, ~nding, .to confer immortality on tll61ijts,, 
ltiv'WM ~u.by;who~ Dadhyang Ri~hi, when about to tie~,p!ffl 
a ~me,Jnontha'.sacrJfice, enlarged his door for the gods, by 
wbo~: t~ Bi4hm~s obtain (their ilesire), by whom our h<1ats 
obtain ',fciQd, with prosperity, bringing water for the sa~isf~. 
tion of the gods, . ' 

18. Soma, the purifier, flows down in many drops through 
the goat's hair straio,er, and, himself pure, keeps sounding in 
the presel!ce of the siligers. The priests by their hymns* 
purify the powerful Soma, who performs his frolics amid the 
sacred liquid, and sits above the sacred goat-hair mat ; and 
the Sages, in the three daily sacrifices, unitedly praise him on 
all sides. The desirer of food, the sprinkler, is being 
produced in the receiving.vessel, and like (a horse) 
11pringipg (into battle), the purifier, uttering his voice, rushes 
forward, 

, .19. Soma is flowing down pure ; he is the creator of in-
tellect, the creator of heaven, the creator of earth, the creator 
of fire, the creator of the Sun, the creator of Indra.t Soma, 
when he goes sounding to his holy place, is Brahma among 
the gods1 the fixer of -their respective merits among the poets, 
the Rishi among the BrahmaJ?.s, the buffalo among horned 
animals, the hawk among the vulture tribe, the sword among 
cutting instruments. Soma the purifier, with vibratory mu-
tion, inspires us wit~ songs and soul-moving hymns, sending 
forth as rivers a flood of sound. Soma, who sees the inwru-d_ 

• Or Addlnr it to dhi. their fingers, 
t Soma is 'here appuemly identified with what the Hindus now 

term Brahm, 




· All~Yi'v'A:.v;, 
'! \ ·' 

soul a..,fis the. rainer pf felici~y/ :sit•/c#~n; :.~oifi.~•.fe~ 
h' u · a;ti:hectmen..tb/ina:''lt·wefl sldllettfn .. +1t, m'AW!l!d)f 
II;-~~. >·11.. ·,.,", 6~ .. ,. .. ".•,if"'I, • .. •ct •. ''f•r;:!•...t,\,.:,.,.~,sr~~Jt._.:,Jn-,-r~ c~~,.i .,:,., .. ,." ., ... • 

ao{/po, 1~·,comeinto tne presence 0[ ~OUl'\ ."Jl\';.c A~ 
grow{~~ ,O\let the ol)lation"s, and is a tnost''lg ·:~ ;"' 
po~ri~l1 .protector,, , Let this Agni be present-with' u" 'a4. ·',. 

<' ' ,.~ • .i -· ,, ," i , "• ., ~' ' 

ca'rp~llter is .w.ith the bodies he is about · to reduce'; fc( fdr,m ; 
anl by ~i$ il:i•~om let us become famed. It is this ~t\who 
among the gods goes to the place whePe all~estimable' things 
are freaiured up ; let him come to us, bringing provisions. ' .. 

21.f Drink, 0 lndra, this moon-plant juice; for it ,is 
most' excellent and most exhilarating, and no death-bringing 
potion. In the sacrificial hall let the streams of the spa~klirig, 
liquor distil into thee. There is no charioteer like thee, 0 In~, 
dra, who drivest thy pair of gold-green horses ; there is · no 
one like thee in might, nor are there any horses like thine. 
Do ye serve Indra with alacrity, sing the sacred hymns, an4. 
bow with reverence. Let the moon.-plant juice be got ready 
for him, who holds the first plate among the gods. · 

22. 0 Indra, possessor of the horses Harl, come hither, 
accept of our sacrifice, and bear it away. 0 thou resplendent 
and exhilarating god, drink of the expressed juice, pleasant 
as honey to the soul, and fitted to exhilarate the senses. In~ 
dra, fill thy belly anew with the expressed moon-plant juice, 
sweet as if distilled from the etperial regions ; let the heaven-
ly, exhilarating, pleasant-sounding liquor find a place with 
thee. Indra, like a friend, advanced to the front of the battle, 
and slew V:ritra. He, like a hero, hewed down the hosts Gf 
the D~nav~s, and, as a protector, subdued our foes; when.; he 
had enjoyed his moon-plant liquor. 

[End of the Fifth Adhya'ya.] 

• i.,., to increase our herds, 
t Some copies tiave here, "In this place praise tbou Al!'ni, who is most 

celebrated by all chanters, and first honoured at sacrifices." 




' 
SIXTH AQHV,VYA, 

1. · -P6ur oul':pur~ the. eow"{it@u.c~,;'.~i~~ing, 
gold-producing, vegetabl~ moon.plant . J~icet,, 'W~v;~,. inter. 
mingled 'wfth the waters. Thou, 0 Soma, art · a' '.ftl'o.i ' heroic 
dMriity ;·· our priests have seated themselves to petf~ni) the 
wo~in thee the olliniscient. Thou, 0 Soma, _art desired 
by ·tat, tlriln in every quarter; thou art fhe purifier, tbe tainer 
of ttie wate~ to whic~ thou proceedest in many drops. Let 
hill\ strain out par(, to us gold, with all kinds of wealth, and 
may· 'fre be ordained to live ' on earth. 0 imperial Soma, 
haying yoked thy green swift-going (horses), thou makest 
thy way to all the inhabitants of the world. Let these thy 
horses distil the delicious shining liquid. 0 Soma, the offi. 
dating ptiests are standing engaged in the performance of 
t1ij rites. 

21,: 0 o'mniscieht (Soma), the streams of thee the purifier, 
likl! the rays of· the Sun, flow forth in abundance. 0 Soma, 
ii\ wholn the sweet juices reside, and who conferrest on us 
wisdom, thou distillest on all sides all valuable forms from 
tlie tirmanient, and sendest them to us. Manifested, 0 puri-
fiet, 1ike .the radiant Sun, thou proceedest to the receiving-
veisel, uttering thy voice. , 

3. 1 'l'he purified radiant drops of moon-plant juice 
pto<:eed In their course, and, mingled with the produce of 
the C'0\11'1 . mix with the holy waters. The moving juices 
proceed like torrents to the low grounds, and the purifying 
liquids encircle Indra, (and bring him to the sacrifice). 0 
Soma, the purifier, the exhilarator* of Indra, thou art pro-
c~dihg 'forwatd on thy way, and, pressed by priests, art 
being brought as an offering (to the gods). Soma, when 
pressed by the stones, assumes his sacred form, and moves 
all around in the belly of Indra. 0 Soma, the exhilafator 

• Qr ifltoxicator. J'he · word usually ref en to that incipient· in• 
cbriatlon which excites the powers of mind and body, 




our , ., : .i • 
.,. ~~;f (ft' 

swee " .•. -- ... ·:•··' :t 
' ,. -i • Jl!! ,.,i--,_;;,,;,d """. 
· eh .111~, 

,t1::.t>1 ai~wifi(So~a1''-»ho _beci>infttf)llte~#' ,· ,lt,i 
the]91f's:.fiait Wti.1'.iiiet', £of the banquet:,of' ttte :gocb; · , ,. et';• , ·: 
the :·ih~ti-~t·' that sub'duest an -'out fo~s;·, He;tht~,' 
give~; ·,~dioot fail, food a. thousand-fold · more• thailHfihq;,, 
require/ l!ecompanied with her<!s of cows, to ihose<that,~ele-: 
bratthis· prai~e. · It is thou, 0 Soma, that purifiest:·ind -poat•r 
est EoHh 'our praises. Let that Soma give us f~d a,u_d all 
kinds 'bf wealth with good-will. Pour out for the ~.:S-
fame~to11lerring, undecaying wealth, and bring·lobd'~,:"10. 
chanters. Thou, 0 purifying Soma, in the form of the: 'ltOU•' 
drous Agni, glorious as a king, didst mingle thyself witbwr. 
songs. Soma himself, though the principal divinity in the 
sacrifice, when among the waters is afflicted for the pdrpose 
of saving others,* and, after being pressed out pure-b1 the 
hands of the priests, takes his seat in the receiving•vessel. 
0 Soma, playing thy frolics like one begging a gift';' thou 
arrivest at thy pure state, and bestowest prosperity.cauttilg 
strength on him that celebrates thy praise. 

5. Strain out for us over and. over again, and in great 
abundance, thy juice in a nourishing stream, and bestow oil 
us every valuable thing. 0 Soma, since to thee belongs C-the 
might, and to thee the provisions which are produced by, i•ee-
in· the form of the nourisher, do thou sit down on tbd'.lb\le-
producing sacred grass, 0 Soma, strain out for us,;fli' thy 
purifying. stream, without fail, and by the speediesfmeans, 
the wealth that consists in cows and ho~es; · Do thou, the 
subduer of hundreds of foes, who conqucresfbut never art 

•. The word for ' afflicted' is ' d111ht11r11,' This is the first passage 
in _:hich th~ ~ic11w111 suffering of a deity is spoken of u' beneficial to 

hi1 worshipper■, ' · · · 

15 




Jt4 .<DHVA1VA Vl1. 
. . : ,:.,;,·:i:,, ' ' ' 

conquered,, a!ld who, as int~. 3:t: 't"-"tLl.t~~::~,~at t&y 
-ea~; flo.w,forth puro (for uJi}i / 

(kf~.e swe~-juice-dj,tilli~g atreams;ar~·~µi~',Pf5pared 
f~,:01u•1p~ervation; si~ thou down w:ith t~mt>n tAA:;:Jacred 
:g~1:'0,,WMn pressed, distil thyeelf for the drinking "J~dra, 

· fpmceeding by thy diversified paths, seating thy~lf fn the 
•OIUb of-·~ sacrifice.* 0 Soma, most pleasant to tn.e taste, 
and ytbe conferrer of riches, do thou strain out for th~ des. 
ce11dants of Ailgiras the sparkling liquor . 

. , , 7; The glories, 0 Agni, are manifested as the lightnings 
from.a rafnv cloud, or as the radiance of the morn when shed 
.on:tbe fields of corn or on the forests. Thou thyself puttest 
the food into our mouths. When, 0 Agni, stirred up by the 
wind, thou quickly fallest on the shining(wood), thou proceed . 
. est fprward, surrounding the food provided for thee : and 
· like as charioteers go separated from one another into the 
field of battle, so do the radiant emissions of thee, the un. 
decaying divinity. 0 Agni, we and our assistant priests 
worship thee, and none other than thee, that we may receive 

. a. share in 'the oblations offered in this lower world, 0 th-0u 
mighty divinity, the giver of intelligence, the prosperer of 
the sacnfice, the beholder (of the gods), the subduer (of our 
foes), and the source of wisdom. 

8. 0 Mitra and Varui~a, your aid is unfailingly manifested 
in giving us abundance ; and your favourable disposition to, 
wards us is most certainly worthy of our adoration. O Mitra 
and Varul).a, void of enmity, we (sing praises) in your pre, 
sence, to obtain food and a place of abode ; may we through 

. you obtain (prosperity~ Preserve us, 0 Mitra and Varul).a, 
with all kinds of preservation. 0 illustrious saviours, do ye 
save us, and grant that by means' of numerous sons we may 
subdue our foes. 

• The veuel which receives the juice and in which the spirit i1 pro• 
du1:ed-lhe Yoni, 




·· · . AQ-.yJ!'f'tJ~t\ 

9. O ln~ra, when , ~t,1>~~j ;b,,;: ~-.an. ~f:f 
'·b i~tiv.--·_,..i.t:.· · •t.i~.· ·.· ::~<.it.;•t1~a ... 'bu,:i . .:. .. -strengt xn-,r,,~f~<li~ee.c~ ',eL*P .' \ r ,JI'!! 

thou ha~b-~jn,k bur ~~O:.plant liquor.1, id 1 t , ; .. 
tending<with Ju'r foes,··tbe · eyes·of alf inhta.;ei-.act , . , , 
were trethbli'rlgly fixed 'on thee ; but when thott be<:Mi~;vki. ·· 
toriodsi,~~1:-itbe·enemy (their terror vanished). 'I esteem· the 
voice ··\\-hiclt extends to the eight quarters of 'the 'eutb; 
and e~n expands to the ninth (zenith regW,s), ,r~rid 
which · makes , the sacrifice prosperous, still far ' below · the 
praises of lndra. 

10. 0 Indra and Agni, these songs celebrate you; do ye, 
the givers of happiness, drink the expressed juice. 0 heroes, 
there are in your possession a hundred thousand much-desired 
(~orseil) for the use of the institutor of the sacrifice. Come, 
o':•1ndra and Agni, bringing them along with you. 0 heroes, 
Indra and Agni, come with them to this expressed moon-
plant sacrifice, to drink the moon-plant juice. 

11. Leaving thy native seat in the forest,t thou, 0 most 
glorious Soma, proceed est to the receiving-vessel, making· a 
great and continued noise. Let the drops of moon-plant 
juice, incorporating themselves with the waters, distil for 
India, for Vayu, for VarU11,a, for the Maruts, and for Vislu,lu. 
0 Soma, whilst thou givest us food for our sons, cause to flow 
to us from every quarter wealth which shall be reckoned by 
thousands.t 

12. Soma, when pressed, flows down through the elevll-
ted plain~ of goats' hair, in a gold-coloured inebriating stream, 
with the speed of a mare. He who unites with the produce 
of the cow, flows down to mingle with that produce, and th~ 

111 This passage is intended to extol the strength of the spirit, 
t 0,- ;,,-haps ntt,,-, sitting on thy native seat over the waters, 
; i.,,, IQ abundant that the odd portions will not even be counted. 
§ Here 1111,11, is used in a double sense (as above, 'Ilana, for •wate~'. ,I"' 

'a for~'), 'Chere is ·a play upon the word, the goat's•hair strainer )1~1)1 
compared to I mountain-top, 




'ii~' - .... M>tt~A~A(Vt. 
,•,1:t1fri,u .vr! lif,;·,,i ,L •r · ..... r· ·1· ...... ~av ,;,;, ,J,:_,r_.· ~ 

, ..• ,h• /:t-:r:t;, :'J: 
:!~ .-~,~~~~-. 
~-.u~!; ~;eh~: ~rifi~;., 4~ t~()~ ~ii:ii·--~h ceies 
~-,~ffr~ria}.;wealth a{! ~~If ~- wo~~fi_ot;'._~1ini~tioi 
ml~ 'f., ,qi .praise. () rainer 'of_ Messl:'!f~ ... w6~ pQl'ges1 
fr,~,n· ,;~il,~)¥e (?f the piou,s), ~hi!e with thy: gof~n ,tinge 
&hou, resoundest over the sacrificial grass, ~t do w!", on thy 
~Ii'-! s~~· Since you, Soma a,nd Indra, are the, possessors 
pf 1Aa: tl\ings, tn'i protectors of the herds of cows, ~d lords 
pen,mount, do ye partake of the juice offered up, in our sacred 
rite~.... . .. ,,. , . . 
,I. '.141 lndra, t~ slayer o,f Vritra, is extolled b.y 01;1r hymning 
.he_(p~~ t.o ob.~in, exhilaration and strength. Him thell we 
invoke for aid in all our great struggles ; and 111ay he 
pr11Reot ~ .w\th his aids in every 1.esser conflict. Since, O 
ln~fA1.; ~Ii~ art a hero, art of thyself an army, convey to u1, 
JlnQPS.ef\'.f.~ the vast (treasures of the enemy}; and, since 
~\lpq, a~: thll, ex.alter of the depressed, best0,w many gifts on 
Jly;Jnstitl!\Or of the sacrifice. When (our armies) g0, forth tc 
e,ttl111 l#Jhem conquer, and bring back loads of riches, fo1 

; th!IJ 1,:>erf1>rmer of thy sacrifices. 
15. In like manner the (heavenly) cows, that shine to . 

.getber, wit), lµdril,, drink of the sweet juice erepared)~ th< 
Jacmii:e, qnd~ accomp,;u;1ying t,he sender of rain,_ deHght }hem 
:i;elves togi;t~er, and stay to enjqy the blessings qf his govern 

, , 1Pent, , Lqving to be, ~trqked by, him, a.nd , c:>f varfous . col~'urs 
.tllcy miP.gle. t~e~r. m.!I~. with the. moon-plant juice; Thes< 

·: cows, belqyed of _ln,dra,_ h~rl the dest_ru~tive_ thinderhf?lt1 . ~nd 
fixed .in .... their places, desire, to ,live, un,der ~~e reig,n of ,Indra 
PoslffSOrs of intellect, they ,maintain hia st~ength by th< 
nourishment '(they yield), and make hown .bis man: 
mighty deeds, to lead ( our foes) to. reflect well ere (they at 
tack us). 




· oiP~llm-:phlaisarll h " ... 
~f'puriied by· iiienj :nd d~i~4i~·'. , ,;,,,,.. _,, .• _, 
~l;;~ .. th.ey,. _ador_n a hotse who~·~~- :,; : 1~.~ 
battl~1.,tQ. let the pnests· render glonous this ia .... ,"- ; ~e, 
wb'fch. ~ey brfog forth in the sacrince for thet•~• :/.7 o( 
aea~".- · 1 ··t .. "· . 

• ~ 'I~~ 

~1· 0 lord of food~ cause to shine among u~ the. resi,len. · 
dell~ mighty, nourishing, deity-desired liquor, and bring us-in 
eontict with the watery treasure, that floats in mict-air.' • 0 
thou poss~ssed of holy might, who art pressed by the pllinks. 
attd like a king art the supporter of thy subjects. come t9 ua 
aiid pour out pure to us from heaven an all-diff11sivc shew~ 
of ratn; and be propitious to the rites performed by ou,r .'h~, 
who is e~gerly desirous of cows, 

18. (Soma) is the giver of life to the sacrifice, -the·,o» .of 
the revered waters, that introduces into the 51rifice his -re.,_ 
plendent person, and diffuses himself through the much .. 
desired. oblations, both here below and elsewhere, 
When Soma enters into Trita Rishi's secret r,oom, he 
bows with reverence in the place , where are the bruis. 
,ing planks, hard as stone; and afterwards (the priests) praise 
him, their beloved (god), in the seven sacred metres, ]ly 
means of his streams, he causes lndra, the gi~er of wealth, 
to _come to the three daily sacrifices, performed by me :· Trita, 
and accompanied with pacificatory hymns; for our. intel~gent 
chanter knows to select the suitable hymns. . 

19. 0 Soma, when pressed, and endued with . all thy 
surpassing sweetness, pour out in thy pure stream thy juice 
for ladra abd Vish]1.u. and all the gods, that they may aH jQin 
in Qur ball<Juet. The guileless fingers (of the prie-sts) press 
thy, a~bum person, 0 purifier, in tlie holy sacrifice. conusting 
of various rites, as the mother cow, while licking it; presses 

• 




AD~XA'V,~, .i•• 
',' ' ' 

•. ~~-:~~l)'~t'!>.d.!~'1 ~~f. ·:O ,P.~~· ,r .of -~.~bty ~s, . . thou 
1usta1~~f,r:. ~V. J,~ . e,~-')j:t'~, ,; . ,.f, ,:·'-1'~ t~-""~ 

w •fted'~ ~et w.t'i!Cm ' "· · · · · ,.,, 
gro. ,\.,;;,,y:,,1~,:~;,,;,_ .... , .!,,"•/: ' .. • ',:· , .. ., 

;,~~11~;,,eo~I. ,spar~llng' moo11-plallt HijllOr, ;1 ~· 
mo~~[I~-, flood, imparting strength to· Jndr~11ri'1 .,~w.. 
beini::P~~J~td _for bi11 delightful exhilaration. At.tbuame 
tim~,'.tltelord of strength slays the lUkshas!s, and anni~ 
every file, while be confers wealth (on the sacrificers): .. After 
being ~ased by the stones, the moon-plant, (in the form of 
juice,) feeling its way obliquely through the hair-strainer, 
drips down pure in a sweet stream ; and now an inebriating 
resplendent divinity obtains Indra's friendship, and flows 
forth . for the exhilaration of the god. The resplendent god 
Soma, who renders holy our rites, is being purified, and 
by ll!eans of his juice comes in contact with the gods, while 
be overshadows the preservative rites, during the sacri~ 
fice, while the ten fingers, making him more forward, 
lead him from the mountain to where the goat's-hair. strainer 
is placed. I, 

21, 0 divine Agni, ·~e light up thee, the shining indes-
tructible divinity. In whatever part of the heavens thy flame, 
worthy of all praise, emits its radiance, from thence do thou 
bring food for those that celebrate thy praise. 0 Agni, lord 
of light, the sacrifice, accompanied with sacred hymns, is 
being 'offered up to thee, the radiant god, 0 possessor of all 
joy, destroyer (of foes), lord of men, bearer away of the obla-
tion, it is being offered to thee ; bring food to those who cele-
brate thy praise. 0 possessor of all joy, lord of men, thou 

· ~eNest ,the oblation-presenting spoon and its cover both 
intl,'thj mouth. ·o lord of strength, during the singing of the 
. hymlia, grant our desire, and bring food to those that celebrate 
. thy prai&«i;. . 

• Probably an allusion to the serpent, Sama, or the spirit, leaves the 
moan•plant, and mlnates as a liquor with th, waters. 




Abi-h'..i'vi'Vu. 

, ' . 2a .. •_ (0. sit\get~i ' ;idj': the . ~eaf paci~iti~Y'' , 
in· p~~i ,J(the ~lse; :~i~ty/lJod~pr:01. · • ,., 
praise-lov)llg lndra. Thou, 0 lndia, art the 
thou didst light up the Sun ; thou e;rt the creator:·' ;,n__ gt1 
tb,runiversal, divinity, the mighty one; ·O lnd~!f~St)e weht• 
est forth with thy radiance, illuminatirig thel'M.~~eti•, anc 
lighting up the . Sun. All the gods, through th91f~d11hip 
become subservient to our wishes. · ',\ --~ 

23. The moon-plant is bruised for thee, 0 lrtdra; 1 :c 
possessor of might, overwhelmer of enemies, come, fill us witt 
animal vigour to the extent that the Sun fills the heavenf wit! 
his rays. 0 slayer of Vritra, ascend thy chariot drawn. bJ 
those gold-coloured ·horses that are yoked by pronoun<iing ar 
incantation. Let the bruising-stone by its sound bring thJ 
spirit graciously into our presence. Let his gold-colou11C< 
horses bring Indra, indomitable in might, to the eucbaristii 
!iymns and the sacrifice of Rishis and men. 

[End of tke Sixth Adky4ya.j 

SEVENTH ADHVA'VA, 

1. The light of the sacrifice, the sweet, the belove, 
(liquor) is being distilled in purity. It is the preserver of th 
gods, the creator (of happiness), and the source of grea 
wealth. It is that joy-mspiring, most inebriating, sens~ 
delighting liquor, which brings to us the treasures of . heave 
and earth, and of the middle regions. The possessor of a 
things, the lord of heaven, the all-seeing, who n1ove_s in 
hundred streams, flows down with a resounding. noise int 
the receiving-vessel; and the gold-coloured divinity sits i 
the house of his friend, being rendered pure by the conducl 
ing hairs of the strainer, and becomes to him the ;ainer c 
blessings. 0 Soma, when purified, thou drippest dow1 

• In 1h, original, 'Vcihaf Sama.' Thil second divisio!I is the 'Vrih, 
Sama,' 




. •• ,At>~W~:,V.U• . 
. ,' 

ccf,1119.~i'4fO ~e, ptes~PC!A(i"tN.,,, '9#:1Nt.1,Jp,o4.. ~th 
ft ·f,.of · · ~ · d -~· Lon'nnrM · · ·1~ 

• u~~'.'.(~., \~~1. '''T1~,1~~·•1;.;.jr~Jt;&~ 
•~f~~~.:' ~' ( tls9,~.,)}IJJ, l~ }l(f 

. . ·. t-~_.ll0t14!ltellt t~e. fl!i~d,t~t.,.~~~•-jf\d 
~\ front. of the' ~ores of (our ~~q!i~'t.• 

, , : ,as thou art pressed by.file petf,o"mae~.,~~ 
.~•~It u,criflce. ,. .. 

11,,.,,,~e · fleet, shining, evety-where-diftu~ ,dfops:;:~f 
r ,m°'~nt juit;e1 begging for cows, horses, and hero~, ~e 
, ~ .. ~~J'l!d .. Rendered shining by the priests, an~., PJlP• 
, ~ .J.>y:. ~ir, 11irms, they drop down pure through • ~• 
pti-J,air .•i~ve, Let them, 0 Soma, pour out pure for 

I thy, i-14clng host all heavenly, earthly, ,and air-~rn 
\ 1lrt4Jlll'CI, 

.,3., Quickly strain out pure, 0 Soma, the holy juice 
: .. der,ired by-the gods; and1 0 shining juice, enter into Indra, 
. 0 rainet of felicity, most illustrious Soma, cause to come to 

Ill the mighty waters, and sit down on ,thy sacred seat,t for 
thou art out supporter, Soma, the performer of our glorious 
actions, milks out the delightful sweet juice, the stream of 
the pressed producer of wealth, and then overshadows the 
sacred wat~rs. When thou, (0 Soma1) art enveloped with 
the produce of the cow, the mighty dripping waters fto'IJ,' into 
thee; the mighty one. The collector of liquids, the sustaii:ier 
of all . things,· the supporter of heaven, Soma desirous of 
union · with us, combined with water, is being purifie<l in the 

· holy place. The rainer of felicity, the gold-coloured, the 
~ighty one, who resembles a friend, and is worthy of, being 
'Ti~hipped, shines with a lustre like that of the Sun. The 
~loving songs are rendered holy by thy might, 0 Soma, 
~-,gith them thou art adorned for thy work of exhilaration. 

l We·~plo1't the presence of the lord of the world to pr.oduce 

. • The,~ninr is, •ater, etc., are obtained by thtle rlta, in wbich 
Soma i1 honoured, · 

t The original is Yoni, 




i " Uj the excitement desttitctive to our foes, u'iJ,,.,.,ff 
thy- p~~~~l: for thy own' exaltation. Tho~ art"t~_';, , _ of 
cowsj' 0 1~~ma1 the giver ot hotset1 the gi\l~fcif~· ,i '. _ ". 
the gi1et,of food': 'the soul of the sacrifu:e, who: C:ct!ttittliBtt, 
th. ·aame· from the days of old. Pour out for usi'· 'Soma', 
in a; s\feet 'Stream, like sh1hVers of rain, th~ 'Sense-stimulating 
juice, , , 

4. 0 purifying Soma, mighty pro"ider of food; &eiltow 
gifts (on the gods), and (conquer the Rakshas4s), and after-
wards grant us prosp-erity. Grant us strength -and wisdom 
and merit, and slay the murderous crew : afterwards, grant 
us prosperity. The purifying priests are straining out pure 
the moon-plant juice to lndra for his drinking: afterwards, 
etc. Do thou, by thy wisely-ordered plans and p~edion; 
cause us to reach the world of the Sun : afterwards, etc. 
Through thy wisely-ordered plans and protection, may- we-
see he Sun_ through all ages : afterwards, etc. 0 Soma1 
possessor of splendid armour, rain down upon us the 
abundant wealth of the two worlds : afterwards, etc. 0 
Soma, who art incapable of injury in the field of battle, 
and art the subduer of foes, rain down on us wealth : 
afterwards, etc. 0 purifier, in this manifold reward-conferring 
ceremony, they have magnified thee by the sacrificial rites: 
therefore, do thou grant us prosperity. 0 Soma, bring 
wealth worthy of being extolled, and that moves all things ac-
companied with horses ; and, at the same time, grant us 
prosperity. 

5. The preserver, the exhilarator, flows down in a stteam 
of pressed nourishing (liquid). The preserver, the exhilara-
tor, flows down. The goddess, who bestows wealth, know& 
to save the man (who offers sacrific~). The preserver, etc. 
We take postession of the thousands (of,hoards of treasure), 
which belong to Drusrya and Purushanta. The preserver, etc. 

6. These moon-plants, the subject of our hymns of 
praise, flow down in a stream of most exhilarating liquor, 

16 




ADKYA'sYA , VII. 

to.proc:urefor uutrertgtb. O.p~6etithou distlll~t streams 
of.~ovkhi»g,: inilk.,fpr the,banquefor the gods ;dlow,do-,n to 
uJ_fl-~'.~'.-• ttourishiog {liquid) .. · 'Distil tir ·us tli~Jl tll••titf)r• 
ing.,ever.yw,here,pr.a.ised, nourishing produce of the ,cow,, la11 
often-~ tb\'lll art celebrated by me J amadagni. •. , ,:,1, 

.. 7,: • We direct this hymn of praise to the honoured pro. 
ducer · of wealth, with all the nice discrimination (the cat'• 
penter employs in polishing) a chariot ; for our properly. 
direet,ed ·"banter is always in a happy mood in the ~:wrcl 
asseml!ly. 0 Agni. grant through thv frit'nd!!hip that w~ may 
never be ~lain. We bring forward the wood for fuel,* and 
olfor up the oblation when we rE'member thee, fortnight after 
fortnight. Prosper our rites abundantly, to procure for us 
long lif~, 0 Agni, grant, etc. We are enabled to light up 
thee, · and carry on our sacred rites to completion ; for by 
thee the gods eat up the offered oblations : do thou there. 
fore bring to us the sons of Aditi. And, 0 Agni, grant that 
through thy friendship we may never be slain. 

a, I praise you unitedly and severally, Mitra, and Varu1,Ja, 
and Aryarn~, the destroyers of our foes, every day at the 
ri&i!lg of the Sun. Let this hymn of praise be productive 
of protection from foes, and strength accompanied with 
treas_µre& of gold, as well, ye wise ones, as for obtaining a 
share in the sacrifice. May we, who are thine, 0 resplen-
dent Mitra, and thine, 0 Varul,Ja, live happily, and obtain 
aread and water, as well as our hymning priests. 

g. Cleave asunder all who hate us, slay in war all who 
oppose us, and bring to us health worthy of our desires. 
Eyery one knows the amount, and the particulars in the 
order of succession, of the wealth which thou hast bestowed 
Oil. ml!,ny. Therefore; bring us, etc. 0 lndra, bring the 
wealth, worthy of b.eing desired, which is stored up in a 
strong, immoveable treasury, which cannot be broken up, 

Twenty-on, pieces of the Pa/J., ,wood. 




ADtfVAr1VA VII, 

re: 0 lndra 'and Agni, ·stni;:e you at every se~~-
tlie,.pre~ors of my,;w:qfiee;' and, when puri~(,;~ 

in the sacrific.ial conflict, regard my oblations... @ lrtdrit:~ .. 
Agni,., de11troyers of your foes, who travel in chatlt>l:i,_; i/dte 
slayers of enemies, the invincible, regard my ablations.'· O· 
lndra and. Agni1 the offerers of the ·sacrifice have prepared 
this exhilaratihg sweet juice for you; therefore regard my 
oblations. <t 

11. 0 Soma, thou art most pleasant to the taste,; there-
fore, having taken thy seat on the reverential spirit-pro• · 
ducing seat, distil it out pure for Indra and the Maruts. 'fhe 
learned men. acquainted with the laws of elocution magnify 
thee, the sustainer (Of all things), and our common priests 
unite in purifying thee. 0 thou, who presidest over, sacred 
rites, let Mitra, Aryama, and the Maruts, drink of the juice 
thou yieldest when distilled. 

12. 0 beautiful-handed Soma, when purified, thou make'st 
thy way into the receiving-vessel. 0 purified Soma, it is 
thou that distillest the yellow, abundant, much-desired 
treasure. 0 purified (Soma), who art rendered pure by per~ 
colation through the goat's-hair strainer, thou makest a nQise 
like a bull when pouring down into the waters. 0 purified 
Soma, thou goest shining with the produce of the cow to the 
well-constructed mansions of the gods. 

13. The ten fingers purify this Soma, whose mother is 
the waters, and he marches along with the gods. The pr~ 
moon-plant juice accompanies lndra, VAyu, and the solar 
rays, into the holy· place. 0 sweet-flavoured, fortune-bring• 
ing Soma, distil thyself in our sacrifice for Bhaga, for V!yu, 
for Pusha, for Mitra, and for Varul}a, & . 

14. Let us have rich cows, the procffieers of abundance 
of food, and let Indra delight himself with us, that we, the 
possessors of food, may rejoice on their acc:o\mt. When, 
0 upholder ( of all things), we can indeed lay hold of one like 
thee, tq whom we can present our petitions, 'thou throwest 




... ., ADHV"'YA· ,vn, 
'in the · objec:t1' ·of our desir.e~ ,:with ·t~e co.nst11noy that the 
spokeuf a wheel tend to the axle.. 0 perform~r,.o.f at~ 
m~fen-ing acts, tho11 · casteit• in t.114 .• wea.ltl! deaired by 
die aio'ker1;with the cQllatai].cy that all the movements (of the 
cart),',1uUo the axle .. 

,5.' We, day by day, call on thee, th6 performer- ol 
praise.worthy acts, with the regularity that people call on 
the rnilobsCClw to the milkif'lg. 0 dtinker of the moon-plant 
juice; come to 011r three daily sacrifices, and dr~nk; the Soma 
juice. · Let the delight o{ thee, posses.,ed of all riches, equal 
his who presents cows to Bral1111al).s. Ua n~ lea.11e us,. to. 
show thyself elsewhen:. 

16. 0 lndra, like the luminous morn, thou fille$t both 
worlds·with thy radiance. Thee, who art the s11perior of the 
superior powers, and the lord of men, did the divine mother 
produce ; thee did the propitious mother bring forth. Thou, 
0 all-wise, bast the strength of the iroQ rod that guides 
the elephant. 0 possessor of riches, as a goat lays hold 
on the twigs with his fore-foot, so dost thou press down 
thy enemies : for thee did the divine mother, etc. 8ring 
down the might of the man who would slay us, or give us 
pain, and place him who would enslave us under our feet: 
for thee did the divine mother, etc. 

17. The resounding, gold-coloured moon-plant juice is 
dripping down on every side in the holy place. Thou, (0 
Soma,) art the distributor of all things amid the exhilarated 
priests. Thou art most affectionate to us, and most intelli-

•·gent, and givest us the sweet liquor produced from the grain. 
, Thou art, etc. All the gods who love one another have ob-
tai.ned in thee a ple\eous draught: Thou art, etc. 

18. It is Soma who brings to the offerer of sacrifice trea-
sures of riches and food, and gives him a suitable place of 
abode. We prepare the. moon-plant juice, of which lndra, tM 
Maruts, Aryama, and Bhaga drink, and with which we_ bring 




Into our presence Mitra aad Varuf)a and lndra, t~ ~~~.f. ll' 
mighty aids. 

19. 6 my friends, celebrate the purifier, who is: in,,tii~ 
ed for the exhilaration of the gods, pleasing hiin with offeritip 
and hymns, as (the nurse does) a child. A.s calves {thin,o 
when licked) by their mothel'S, so are the moon-plants lijade 

to shine (by being sprinkled) with water; and the preserver 
of the gods, the exhiliuator, is rendered glorious by our 
hymns. This most exhilarating pressed moon-plant juice is 

prepared for nourishment, for strength, for- the sacrificial ban •. 
quet, and for the gods. 

20, The shining expressed drops of moon,plant jui~e. 
most quick in their descent, friendly, guileless, and skilled in. 
sacred narration,* and which tend to heaven, are being dis.. 
tilled in purity for our benefit. These drops are those of the 
pressed, wisdom-conferring, cream-united moon"Plant juke. 
which move among the sacred waters, imperishable, and1 
like the Sun, worthy of our adoration. Moving in a tortuous 
path, well.pressed by the stones, and known by . his position 
over the bull's hide, Soma, the procurer of wealth, utters 
his voice so as to be heard on all sides while bringing us 

provisions. 

2 t. 0 Soma, strain out pure for us, in this thy holy 
11tream, the various kinds of wealth in the presence of those. 

who celebrate thy praise, and run down into the liquid-. 

containing vessel ; for to this, (A'ditya,) the origin of all1 
things, and (lndra), the performer of numerous sacrifices,. 
bend their steps. May Soma, give us heroes. Strain out 
pure for us in a clear stream thy own essence, worthy of 
all praise, in the holy place, where thy, sound is heard, and 
let the destroyer of our foes strike down to us sixes oi 
thousands of treasure, for victory in the field of battle, as, 

• AHuding, I suppose, to the noiso they make in fallin1 down into. 
the ve11fl bel'ow, 




' 
~.DHYA'.YA VII~; 

men, sha,ke down showers of rljl fl'll~ from. a tre11, ... Let liis 
{a~o~~i-at~i~g, · (foe)-prostrating, ipigl#y, joy~br~q~g,,.~ .. 
troyiitJ' acts.· bi! manifested . both_ ~ong those ,voo· fight q11 , 
ho~bai:k, and those who engag~ in close fig~, an~ by them 
Jet. ~!'r ca~s~ the_ enemy to sleep the sle~iof ~eath; ~p,;I 
let hill} beat off our foes, and drive back those who neglect 
sat~ii I rit~a. . 

.. a':z. . 0. Agni, be thou near to encircle us all around, as 
our saviour, and as the conferrer on us of happiness. 0 
all-resplendent Agni, who assignest us a place of abode, who 
live1t diffused in food, display thyself in our. presence, .and 
give us food. 

·.23. May we obtain all material substances, and .may 
Indra and all the gods be at our nod. May lndra, along 
with the Ndityas, bestow upon us the materials for sacrifice, 
and strength of body, and offspring. Let lndra, along with 
the' A'dltyas and Maruts, and attended with his company, 
furnish us with medicinal substanceli. 

24. Do ye with zeal in our pre11ence perform the service 
of lndra. 

[End of tlte Seventh Adhy4ya, 

EIGHTH ADHYA'YA. 

1. As the Rishi Us'ana speaks his poetical compositions, 
110 Jet. our divine priest accurately narrate the birth of the 
gods, The performer of mighty acts, the possessor of pure 
radiance, comes forward like a boar, raising his voice, and 
dttering the earth with his feet. The highly devout com-
pa»y of sages quickly repair, at the sound of the noise of 
br~islng 1the plants, to the house where the sacrifice is being 
offered ; and my friends celebrate with proper intonati(ins 
the god worthy of our host, the invincible, pure Soma, Soma, 
putting forth his far-famed speed, tr;mls, though merely 
as if in sport, and without any effort, so that no roadster 




ut 

tall ~oifte UP to 'him. The posse,ssl!r of penetratini :?~~~ 
diffuses splendour in abundante, ~pearing by day 9f, ~:~~ 
colour, and by night luminous. · · · 

2. During the time of bruising, the drops of inoon-plaQt · 
juice, sounding like a chariot, or like a horse · desiring food, 
proceed forward for the purpose c,( bestowing wealth (on 
the sacrificers).-When marchingJw1th the speed of a chariot 
(to the oblation-hall), the arms of the priests sustain him, 
(Soma,) as • those of labourers their loads. As kings .a~e 
glorified by hymns of praise, and a sacrifice by the seven 
priests, so is Soma by the produce of the cow. The sweeJ 
moon-plants, when pressed, flow in a stream, and with a 
loud voice, for the production of inebriation. The juices 
flow down during the time of bruising with a noise for ,the 
glorious toper lndra, who gives its splendo11r to the morning. 
The chanters of the sacred hymns, the men who bear the 
juice of the rainer of felicity, now shut the ancient doors. 
As the seven oblation-offering priests surround the place 
of the one Soma, so do his consorts strive to please him, 
In order that I may behold the Sun with my eyes, I place 
Soma, the navel of the sacrifice, in my navel, and milk out 
the juice of the prosperer of all our works. lndra beholds, 
(0 Soma,) with his eye the beloved manifestation of thy 
glorious person, when placed in the cavity of the humaa 
body. 

3. Quantities of moon-plant juice, bringing prosperity 
and knowing what is adapted to this sacrifice, are being 
prepared,· and enter by the way of the solemn rite into thti 
service of the gods. The soul of the sacrifice, the swee(fl 
savoury mighty Soma, is worshipped by oblations, and goes 
to bathe in the sacred waters. He who raises his voice is 
worthy of being offered to the gods ; the sovereign, the 
rainer of leficity, the faithful, the indestructible, when he 
goes to his place of abode, utters a sound upon the sacred 
waters. When he who knows how to perform all rites, who 




!fOIRt '·JU!' ))lire; fot us 011r 1night1 :pl'Ql!eed• · td \¥betei'thl! 
1 ~?•~ is heard, the provider of foad is .. -..iprel'eilt, 
~i~uri, foEJd. -The pure Soma ad1ancee·· agai11st our 
•-itib1,1 klnt against his rebellious subjects, whrn the per. 

•· ~-•qt the· sacred rites 'send him forward. The gofd. 
: ~. the· beloved Soma, mixed with the waters, sits all 
'tNUnd on the goats' hair, and himself utteri11g a sound, is 
worshipped by song. He who is filled with j~y ~hrough the 

':performance -0f this sacred rite, goes exhilarat;d to wait on 
W-Ayu, lndra, and the twin sons of As'wini. Streams of sweet 

•',juice flow into Mitra, Varu1,1a, and Bhaga. Those then 
who· are acquainted with Soma approach them with pleasure . 
. :()1 heaven and earth, for the obtaining of the sweet, 111iurish. 
Ing juice, do ye put into our possession of wealth, provisions, 
ud flocks of cattle. 

4. (0 Scima), we render homage to thy pleasure-pro-
ducing, wealth-collecting, saving, much-desired might. We 
wotship thee, the exhilarator, the eminent, the wise, the cele-
brated, the preserver, the much-desired. 0 possessor of 
:great riches, the great, the wise, we ask for our sons wealth 
;and intelligence, while we worship thee the preserver, the 
1:1nch-desired. 

, 5. The (priestly) gods are producing Agni, the head of 
,the heavens, who ascends from earth, who <lwells in heaven, 
who is born on acconnt of the sacrifice, who is full of legen-
da.ty lore1 the brilliant god, who is the guest of men, and the 
mouth of the gods, and our saviour. When thou, (0 

~i,) art produced, all the gods move towards thee,* as a 
!Jither to his son; and, 0 (Vais'wanara), friend of all men, 
~¾Hien• thou shinest forth as the preserver of all, (the Br.lh-
·~}obtain immortality through these thy rites. Our gods 
greatly ptaise thee, the navel of the sacrifices, the abode of 
""alth,'the mighty receiver of oblations, and produce thee, 

• Or.all tbe (priestly) gods unite in praising thee, 




ADHYA'YA VIII. Ug 

who dwellest in all men, who art the chariot of the oblations, 
the originator of the sacrifice. 

6. 0 ye priests, celebrate Mitra and Varuiµ in songs at 
the height of your voice, and do ye both, possessed of great 
strength, come to lhe long-continuing sacrifice. Ye who are 
the universal lords, the womb of the waters, yourselves 
divinities, and mighty among the gods, you can impart 
to u, the immense wealth of heaven and earth : we adore 
that great power of yours, which is great even among 
divinities. 

7. Come, 0 lndra, famed for thy varied radiance; these 
goblets of moon-plant juice await thy coming, which have 
to-day been rendered holy by the fingers (of the officiating 
priests). lndra, come, and listen to the sacred hymns of the 
offerers of expressed moon-plant juice, moved by our solemn 
rites and the worship of the attendant Br{ihma1,1s. Indra, 
possessor of the gold-coloured horses, come quickly to hear 
our sacred hymns; accept of our moon-plant juice and sacri-
ficial viands. 

8. Praise that Agni, who, when by hi~ radiant flame he 
encircles all the forests, renders them black by the touch of 
his tongue. He who throw,; rnto the shining divinity propiti-
-ous offerings for Indra, will receive from him pleasant, pre-
serving rains for the production of glorious crops of 
corn. lndra and Agni, do ye two furnish for us strength-
ening food and awift horses, that we may supply you with 
oblations. 

9. 0 Soma, thou goest forward into the beautifully form• 
ed belly of Indra, and, as a friend, lillest without overflowing 
the sounding cavity. As a male among females, so does 
Soma by a hundred winding paths make his way into the 
receiving-vessel.* The meditative, joy-loving, praise-loving 
i;iagers are moving about in the thatched oblation-hall, and. 

• i, ,., winding 11,rough 1he hairs Ill the strainer. 

17 




ijd ADHYA1\'A VIII. 

the chanters are celebrating the gold-colourt>d j~ice,. which 
the cows by their milk make more suitable for us~.· 0 briUi. 
ant Soma, cause (the collected abundant store of provisions 
and liquid nourishment to flow to us in thy stream; which 
liquid nourishment, in the three' daily sacrifices, milks out for 
us a well-p~ovisioned, powerful, excited race of renowned 
heroes. 

10. He alone who performs sacrifice makes lndra his 
friend, who ever prospers his worshipper, is extolled by all, 
is the invincible, the subduer of foes by his great might, and 
is, ~ble in the enga~<'ment to overpower his opponent. I 
praise lndra, who is the subduer of foes, and fierce and irre. 
sistible in the war, where he displays his majesty, and where 
the delighters in sacrifice reverently adore him, and heaven 
and earth bow before him. 

11, 0 my friends, sit ye down, and sing hymns to the 
purifier; adore him with offerings, that ye may adorn him, as 
a father does his son (with jewel,). Do ye bring to perfec-
tion in the maternal waters this juice, the produce of your 
house, the preserver of the gods, the causer of exhilaration, 
the producer of strength to both worlds, as the cow (brings 
forth) her calf. Do ye punfy the strengthening juice, to pro-
cure rapidity of motion and nourishment (to the gods); 
and, since it is most beneficial, prepare it for Mitra and 
Varu:iµ. 

12. The strengthening Soma flows obliquely through the 
holy goat's-hair strainer. The strengthening juice, of most 
powerful energy, mini:led with the water~, and fitted for use 
with the produce of the cow, flows down. O Soma, bruised 
by the stones, and strained· by the priests, descend into the 
belly of Indra. 

13. Those portions of moon-plant juice which are pre. 
pared at a distance, and those that are prepared near at hand, 
and those which abound in the lake S'aryanavat, are all for 
thee, 0 Indra, and tho~e which are prepared in the country 01 




ADHV A,'Y A' lX, 

A'rjika and Kritwa, and on the banks of the rivers (Sar~:tli:: 
etc.), and by the five tribes of men. May those pre$Sed,: 
brilliant floods of moon-plant juice cause rain and an army · 
of heroes to flow down pure to us from heaven. 

14. 0 Agni, I Vatsa wish to bring down thy spirit from 
the lofty, shining heavens. I wish to bring.thee hither by 

a soul-delighting song. Thy eye is steadily fixed on many 
regions, and thou art the lord of all those regions; therefore 
we call on thee in all our conflicts. Desirous of food, we in 
all our conflicts call to our aid Agni, who possesses treasures 
accumulated in wars. 

15. 0 Indra, performer of many meritorious deeds, be-
holder of all things; bring to us might and wealth. We 
invoke the hero who sends down rain. Thou, (0 Indra,) 
art to us a father, thou art to us a mother. 0 assigner to 
us of our place of abode, and pt>rformer of many meritorious 
deeds, we desire the felicity that resides in thee. 0 power-
ful Indra, invoked by many worshippers, the conferrer of 
strength, we call upon thee when engaged in war ; do thou 
grant us heroic armies. 

16. 0 Indra, glorious attendant on sacrificl'!s, the wealth 
thou canst give I have nowhere in this world. 0 possessor of 
riches, bring treasures in both thy hands. 0 lndra, bring that 
fond thou esteemest well wc,rthy of praise, that we may be-
come the recipients of thy bounty. By that much-extolled, 
famed, mighty, unflinching spirit, which thou possessest, 0 
attendant on sacrifices, present us with provisions for our 
acceptance. 

[End of the Eightli Adlzyaya.] 

NINTH ADHYA'YA. 

r. The Maruts in bands purify and adorn the intelligent, 
newly-produced infant Agni. And the bard, for by the regu-
larity of his sound Soma p,oves himself to be a bard, comes 




132 ADHYA'VA IX, 

sounding to the holy vessel. The possessor of an all-oh. 
servant mind, who manifests himself to men, the accepter of 
all, who is worshipprd by thousands, lhe· rectifier of the 
mistakes of poets, the venerable, much-praised Soma, who 
desires to dwell in the third world (the heavenly), encircles 
with glory the glorious Indra. The much-praised hawk, and 
powerful falcon, Soma, moving between the t>xpressing planks, 
\Seated jn the sacrificial ladle, and performing many frolics, 
the consumer (of the produce) of the cow, n,oving quickly, 
lays hold of his weapons; and, when worshipped, the ador. 
able god honours with his presence the sky that sends down 
the waters, as well as the fourth (the lunar) region. 

2. These moon-plants distil the juite that lndra dearly 
loves, and increase his vigour. The purifying ladle-con. 
tained drops of juice move towards Vayu and the sons of 
As'wini. May they impart to us abundant vigour (for a heroic 
army). 0 pure Soma, send, in order to procure for us 
wealth, the spirit of lndra, for I have set myself down on 
the sacred seat of the gods. The ten fingers strain thee out 
pure, the seven priests st>nd thee forward, and the learned 
cbanters inspire thee with delight. We consecrate thee for 
the exhilaration of the gods, along with the produce of the 
cow, when we have well prepared thy the newly-produced 
felicity. The brilliant gold-coloured divinity completely veils 
himself with garments formed from the produce of the cow. 
0 Soma, pour out to us the wealth of the rich, slay all that 
hate us, and procure for us the friendship of lndra. We 
obtain food and otb-pring while waiting on thee, the observer 
of men, .the beholder of all things, who art quaffed by lndra. 
0 Soma, pour rain from heaven, cover the earth with corn, 
and supply us with strength in the battle. 

3. Soma, the p.urifier, with his thousand streams passing 
through the goats' hair, drops down into the well-cleaned 
vessel of Viyu and Indra. 0 ye who desire preservation, 
do ye celebrate the purifying, wisdom-bestowing moon-plant 




ADHVA'YA IX- l3.l 

liquor, well prepared for the banquet of the gods. The 

(goblets of moon-plant liquor, possessed of surpassing power, 
and celebrated in our •~cred hymns, are being consecrat~d 

for the banquet of thP- gods to obtain for us food. 0 
Soma, that we may obtain provi,ions,*, do thou distil 

out for us supplies of food, and such surpassing bodily 

vigour as shall make (our faces) shine. As fleet horses 

urged on by their riders to the war, so are the awift. 
flowing streams of moon-plant juice, which are prepared 

by the priests over the goat's-~air strainer, that we may ob-

tain food. Let these pressed, shining moon-plants distil to us, 

thousands of treaijure, and surpassing bodily vigour. The 

sounding drops of moon-plant juice flow down with. the speed 

that lowing cows run to their calves, and are again borne UJ> 
by the arms of the priests. For the abundant satisfaction of 

Indra, the purifying juice prepared for him utters its voice, 

Do thou, 0 Soma, slay all our foes. Do ye, pure, all-seeing 
slayers of those who refuse to offer sacrifice, sit down on the 

sacrificial seat.t 
4. To form part of the sacrifice, these delight-inspiring 

(goblets of) expre;;sed moon-plant juice are being prepared for 
Indra. Qur wise men call in hymns upon lndra to come to the 

drinking of the Soma, as cows do upon thei~ calves. The 

spirit-distilling Soma sits on his seat on the wave of the sacred 

~ea, and, as the god of wisdom, he resides in fpeech. Som.a, 

the all-seeing the all-wise, the prosperer of all our works, is 
worshipped by us in the navel of heaven, amid the goats' 

bair.t When the moon-plant juice is put within the sacred 

receiving-vessel, the god Soma enters into it. When the 
god Soma enters the sweet-juice-containing vessel, he utters 

• Or wictory in our w•rs. 

t Addres5ed to Soma, or to the other gods. 
t Referring to I.lie litraiocr, whK:li is elevated at som~ diatance ~bovt 

the ground, 




134 ADHVA'VA lX, 

a sound that, passing through mid-air, strikes the heavens 
above. When daily praised, the lord of forests, who sends 
auxiliaries to men, ( drinks in) the milk of praise which 
our sages yield. 0 purifying Soma, pour down on us in a 
stream thousand.fold~ of brilliant, happiness-conferring 
wealth. 0 performer of glorious acts, intelligent, press-
ed Soma, from thy distant place in the heavens do thou 
regard us, and send us down in a stream all delightful 
things. 

5. As the noise of the waves of the sea, or the sound of 
an arrow in its flight, so do thou send forth •thy quickly-
moving voice. The voices of the chanters of the three VedAs, 
desirous of engaging in the sacrifice, rise aloft as often as 
thou, desirous of mortal birth, ascendest the elevated goat's-
hair strainer. The priests, straining by means of the goat's. 
hair sieve, send down on every side the beloved, green, stone. 
expressed, purifying, sweet, dripping liquid. 0 most exhila-
rating god, preserver of religious rites, pour down into the 
sacred vessel thy juice in a stream that may enter the belly of 
Indra, the object of our adoration. 0 most inebriating god, 
distil thyself pure, and, beautified with the shining produce of 
the cow, enter the belly of Indra. 

6. Distil, in this rite, juice for the banquet of lndra, 
which (through its exhilarating power) slew in battle (by the 
hands of Indra) ninety times nin.e of his foes. In one day 
Soma slew Sambara, and destroyed his cities for Divodasa, 
the supporter of 'religious rites, and then subjected to his will 
Divas'a, Turvas'a, and Yada. 0 Soma, possessor of horses, 
send us cavalry, and wealth consisting in abundance of cows, 
and gold; and pour out for us manifold stores of food. 

7. Soma, having slain our murderous foes and those who 
do not give gifts, proceeding to the well-cleansed vessel of 
lndra, flows forth pure. 0 purifying 'Soma, bring us great 
wealth, slay our murderous foes, bestow upon us the fame 
that accompanies heroic descendants. 0 Soma, hundreds of 




ADHVA1\'A IX. 135 

foes cannot slay thee1 when desirous of bestowing wealth, and 

purified, thou comest to give gifts. 

8. 0 Soma, descend with that stream with which thou 
Jightedst up the Sun : do thou descend, and send water for the 

use of man. It is Soma that yokes the horses of the Sun, 

when he is about to move through the heavens over the 

abode of men. "Soma is my master," says the Sun, and 

yokes his gold-coloured horses to the chariot, for the purpose 

of departing. 

9. (0 ye gods), cause your brilliant Agni, who is served 
by all the other fires, and is worthy of oblations, to assume 

his form of messenger in this f'aultless sacrifice : for he takes 
up his abode among men, is the receiver of oblations; whose 
brilliance is scorching, who is fed with clarified butter, and is 
our purifier. Uttering a noise like a horse when satisfied 

with grass, the mighty divinity, breaking over his bonds, fixes 
himself in some suitable place ; and then, 0 Agni, thy . bril-
liance, following the course of the wind, moves along, and the 

road thou followest is darkened. 0 Agni, the immortal, 
shining radiance of thy new-born, rain-sending flames rise 
aloft ; and thou, 0 Agni, in the form of flame and smoke, as 
the messenger of the gods, ascendest to heaven, and enterest 

the presence of the divinities. 

10. We render that Indra powerful for the sl&ying of our 

foe, Vritra. Let him who is the rainer of felicity now rain 

down on us wealth. lndra. was created to confer gifts. He 
is the most mighty, appointed to reside in the mighty Soma. 

He is a most illustrious god, the recipient of praise, and 
worthy to drink the moon-plant juice. He is sharpened like a 
Vajra by praise, and powerful and unconquered, the fierce 

hero, returning unwounded, and is desirous of bestowing • 

gifts. 
II, O ye priests, bring the moon-plant juice pressed out 

by the stones into the holy vessel, and purify it for Indra's 

Jrinkiug. 0 Soma .. tile~ ~ gods and lhe Marnts are consuming 




thy sweet, purifying hourishment. 0 Soma1 press uut the 
most excellent, the tnost pleasant tnoon-plant juice, equal to 
Amrita1 for lndra, the holder of the thunderbolt. 

t2, The sustai~er of the hea\tens flows down, who re. 
quires to be produced anew while he assumes the form. of 
juice. The infuser of strength into gods1 and receiver of 
delight from man, the gold-coloured god1 when produced, 
exhausts his strength in frolics among the sacred waters, like 
a horse with his rider. As a warrior takes up in his hands 
his weapons, so Soma, desirous of sweet oblations, mounting 
his chariot, drives off for the cow-walks (to collect cows for 
the milk required in the sacrifice). And he who infuses 
strength into lndra is put into the holy food by our sacred 
rites, and is adorned by the hymns of our learned priests. 0 
pure Soma, assuming all thy greatness, enter the belly of 
lndra in a full wave; and as lightning descends from the 
cl~uds, so flow thou down upon the two worlds, and 
measure out, on account of our works, abundance of provi-
s10ns. 

13. Although, 0 lndra, thou art invoked by men in the 
east, west, north, and south, yet, 0 mighty god, thou art pre-
sent in the sacrifice of king Anu i and influenced by the merits 
of our many priests, thou, 0 subduer of foes, art present also 
with king Turvas'a. Or, shouldest thou be enjoying thyself at 
the banquet of king Ruma,* or Ras'ama, or S'y!vaka, or 
Kripa, yet when the sons of Kanu, who bear the sacred 
\'iands, urge thee hither, do thou come, 0 lndra. 

14. Let lndra hear both our Rig and SAma Veda hymns, 
which are sung in his presence ; and let the mighty one for 
oor society, and actuated by his own greatness of soul, come 

• These 1111mes aeem descriptive of the nations bordering on the coun• 
t~y· of tile Hindus; perhaps the n•tions on the lndus to the west, the 
Tartars to the north, the Tamulians to the south, and the Burmese or 
Chinese to (he east. 




tr:i the drinking of the moon-plant juice. 'l'fleej abinint<,' · 
thy own ra~nce, and sending down on the two -worlcls • 
rain, their inhabitants ever as suppliants approach, '. ·:·:. ,.) 
thou sittest down as chief among the gods, with all thy~~:: 
intent on drinking the moon-plant bevel'age. ' ,r,:,, :i; 

-15. 0 divine (Soma), pour down thy joke, and let thy" 
exhilarating might enter the long-lived-lndra, and at tb(! 
same time ascend into Vtyu with thy upholding juice; 0 
puniying Soma,* thou seizest the much-praised wealth (oi:'. 
our foes, and, when thou hast slain our foes, thou ftowest'4 
down pure. 

16. [First line translated before.] 0 bestower of ai 
place of abode, we wish a portion of thy much-desired, abod~l. 
conferring wealth. 0 steady mover, grant that we, who 
delight in thee, may always be very near thy stores of focd. · 
Soma, who distib; exhilarating juice through the goatst hair,' 
when pressed, flows down on all sides ; and he who delights 
in the produce of the cow, raised on high, moves in a stream 
during the sacrifice, like a flood of light. 

17. 0 Soma, mighty god, the iea (where the spirit col-
lects), the father of all, distil thyself out pure for the nourish-
ment of all the bodies of the gods. 0 Soma, thou shining 
divinity, flow out pure for the gods, and for heaven and earth, 
and the happiness of man. Thou art the supporter of heaven, 
worthy of being used as a beverage, and a powerful 
divinity ; therefore pour thyself out pure in this rightly~ 
performed sacrifice. 

18. 0 Agni, I praise you, my beloved guest, dear as a 
friend, and valuable as a chariot. Ye (terrestrial) gods, who 
have with solemn rites placed Agni in his two receptaclest 
among men, do ye extol him, and be by him extolled, as 

· • It is easily seen that 5i>ma is the moou-planc or its iuice personi.fi,.;. 
He'li altoldentified wkh the moon, .. ; . . 

t The A 'hav1nfy1 G.irhapati receptacles, « hnftll and eardt. 
11 




APHYA1YA- X. 

t~e> poets do ~o one anothe~. (0 god), who art ev~r-}!oung, 
dp th~it pr~serve the herq~s that . belo~g to \he peff~oner 
of -th~ sacrifice, do thou hear 011r songs, aqq along with !lllr 
o~ _(!ersons preserve our sons. 

19. 0 beloved lndra, conqueror of foes, incapable 9f being 
t(l\¥!Cale~, great as a mountain, superior to !'Very qther bei11g, 
aqd lord ~( heaven ; 0 faithful drinker of the moon-plant 
i\lice, thou art supre111e over heaven and earth, thou art the 
ei~lt~r o( ~he institu\or ~f the moon-plant sacrifice,· and the 
lord 9_£ heaven. Thou_ art in truth. th~ dest~oyer 9f all the 

, enemies' cities, the slayer of the llikshasas, the prosp\lrer of 
men, and the lore\ of heaven. 

2,Q. Thou hast ever been the cleaver of cities, art ever-
you\l,g, art all-intelligent, and of unmeasured strength. lndra, 
th9u, ~rt the upholder of all sacred rites, the bearer of the 
th1mderbolt, and extolled by us in manifold ways.,, Thou, 0 
Indra, didst enter the cave of the cow-(stealing) Bala; 
t~,e injured, terrified gods found a refuge in thee. Sing in 
hymns of praise with all your might to Indra the supreme, 
whQSe girts are lavished in thousands, and even in great 
~~11ndance. 

[End of thf Ninth Adhyaya.] 

TENTH ADHYA'YA, 

I. The collector of the waters spreads himself all around : 
the guardian deity that at first sustained the waters aloft, 
and created the tribes of men, is now the rainer down of 
f~l)~i.ty ; this mighty, expressed, all-supporting Soma is. in 
the holy place on the table-land of the goat's hair strainer, 
risi,ng to his magnificence. 0 purifying, divine Soma, cheer 
MitE~ an.d Varur>a, that they may confer on us food and 
wealth. Cheer, 0 divine Soma, their mightinesses the Maruts. 
Cheer all the gods ; cheer heaven and earth. The adorable 
_Soma, wh~n he h1:mours the gods with his presence, becoming _ 




ADHYA'.\'A VIII. 

he womb of the waters, performs a mighty work. H is this 
purifying god that infused might into Indra, and this brilli • ., 
divinity begot in the Sun his luminous r11,ys. This hnmodaJ ' 
god, like a bird, flies to his seat in the juice-receiving· ves!iel~:;, 
Thi~ resplendent god, when praised by the learned BrA.hmaljl; · 
dips himself in the waters, and bestows valuable gifts oli: 
the institutor of the sacrifice, This pure, heroic Soma, like 
some warrior going forth, is desirous to obtain for us, iri 
union with strength, all valuable thi.ngs. This pure, dripping 
divinity desires a chariot (to come to the sacrifice), desires' 
to bestow (on us gifts), and raises his voice aloud. 

2. This pure, dripping divinity, like a bay horse; is 
adorned for the battle by our hymning, sacrifice-desiring 
priests. This divinity, sustaining no injury from the fingers' 
(of the priests), overt:i.kes all our foes. He who is tfle 
purifier, uttering a sound, speeds his way in a full stream to 
heaven, leaving the earth behind. The purifier, the prosperer 
of sacrifices, who never can be slain, passes on to heaven, 
leaving the earth behind. He who is the gold-coloured',· 
shining divinity, and was born in ancient times, has been: 
pressed for the gods, and is distilling in the holy place. He 
who is the performer of many rites, who has submitted to 
mortal birth, who produces the sacrificial vi;;nds, is now being 
pressed, and is flowing down in a pure stream. 

3. He, the heroic Soma, when pressed by the priests' 
fingers in the solemn rite, proceeds in his swift chariot to· the 
seat of Indra.* He causes many rites to be performed for the 
splendid banquet of the gods, where the immortals crowd 
around. Him mortals strain out into the receiving-vessel, 
though originally pure ; and there he affords for them abtiri-
dant nourishing draughts. He is first consecrat'ea, then' 
carried through the assembly by a holy path, then the priest' 
that bears him pours him out as an oblation. He, the powbr~ 

"' Either in heaveo, or in the sacrificial vessel, 




ADHVA'YA X, 
'' 

ful god, the lord of fluids, advanc~s with go/d~n, &bining rays. 
He shakes his sharp horn_s as some bull chief of the herd, and 
collects riches for us by his might. He, arriving at the proper 
juncture, wholly discomfits the encircling (RAkshasas), and 
comes _down upon their murderous bands. The te.n fingers 
$end forth this gold-coloured divinity, arrayed in becoming 
armour, and the causer of great exhilaration, to prosecute bis 
journey. 

4, He who is the rainer of felicity and the fleet divinity 
proceeds through the goat's-hair strainer for the purpose of 
producing manifold stores of food. The fingers of Trita 
Rishi press forwards by means of the bruising-stones the 
gold-coloured moon-plant juice for lndra's drinking. Coming 
with the quickness of a hawk, he takes up his abode among 
the tribes of men, and proceeds with the eagerness of a para-
mour to his mistress. This exhilarating (spirit) is the son of 
heaven, and is the Soma juice that enters the hair-strainer. 
The gold-coloured god, the sustainer (of all things), expressed 
for the drinking {of the gods), flows down with a noise to his 
beloved seat (in the receiving-vessel). The ten active (fin. 
gers), desirous of performing the ceremony of purification, 
1train out the same divinity pure, for the exhilarating 
draught, 

5. He who is the fleet god, the omniscient, the lord of 
praise, when placed by the priests in the vessels, goes by 
various paths to his holy state through the goat's-hair strainer. 
This Soma, when pressed, drips down in the holy place fo1 
the gods, 'and enters all their bodies. This immortal god, 

, the slayer of Vritra, the exdter of love in the gods, shines in 
his own proper seat. He, the rainer of blessings, while utter-
ing a sound as he is pressed by the ten fingers, runs down 
q\lickly to the {Dro~a Kalas'a) receiving-vessel. He, the 
purifier, Ughted up the Sun, who has his station in the 
heavens, and the joyful god is placed for the sake of exhila-
ration in the holy place. He who is the all-enveloping lord, 




the. resounding god, incapable or being injured1 :i' ~~;):)y , 
the resplendent Sun (into the holy place). , , ,~,: . 

6. The wise, much-prafoed god is subjected to b~ii•~s 
in the holy place, and, when purified, he slays all that :.;hate 
us. He who is the producer of strength, the conqueror of 
all, is being spread out for VAyu a,1d Indra in the holy place. 
He who is the head of heaven, the rainer of felicity, the 
omniscient, expressed Soma, is being carried in consecrated 
vessels. He who is the lover of the produce of the cow, the 
desirer of gold, the pure, resplendent god, the conqueror of 
foes, and himself invincible, utters his voice. He who .is the 
powerful god, the rainer of blessings, the gold-coloured Soma, 
the purifier, is dripping down pure through the air to meet 
Indra. H.e who is the powerful Soma, incapable of sustaining 
injury, and is the purifier, flows down as the preserver of the 
gods, and the slayer of the wicked. 

7. Soma, the rainer of felicity, when pressed, flows 
down in the holy place, as the destroyer of RAkshasas, but 
lover of the gods. He, the all-seeing, gold-coloured, world-
sustaining god, is being distilled in the holy place ; and, 
uttering a sound, he proceeds to the womb of the receiving-
vessel. He who is the fleet divinity, the lightener of heaven, 
the purifier, and slayer of RAkshasas, passing through the 

goat's-hai(strainer, moves forward. He who is our purifier in 
the celebrated sacrifice of Trita, illuminated the Sun with bis 
rays. Soma, the slayer of V:ritra, tile rainer of felicity, the 
bestower of riches, incapable of being injured, mlves on like 
a war-horse. He who is the resplendent and all-wise Soma, 
when urged forward, moves quickly towards the Droi;ia 
Kalas'a, to pay his respects to Indra. 

8. The man who recites the verses relative to the Pij,lrifier, 
containing 'the essence served up by the Rishis, eats the holy 
food perfectly pure, which, through the agency of the air, 
has attained its excellent flavour. The man who, etc., to 
him Saraswatr, the all-encircling goddess, milks out clariied 




ADHYA'YA X, 

',b11tter and- the sweet moon-plant juite. , Let these, veri~• 
relative to the purifier be the causers of ptospetitf; ,tlie 
milJce•• out, of precious things; and the distiller• of butter. 
The. j,uice has been served up by the Rishis, and the water 
of life, , is by them introduced into us Br!hm~. Let the!fl 
v~rie• relative to the purifying god, when the goddesses are 
assembled along with the gods, bestow upon us tliis \'forfd 
and the next, and let them fujfil the object of our desires. 
Let these verses relative to the purifying god pour down to 
us that thousand-fold holy stream with which the gods purify 
our persons. By means of these purifying verses relative to 
the purifying god, causing prosperity, a man reaches paradise, 
enjoying by obtaining food the reward of merit, and tlien 

♦ goes to the abodes of immortality. 
9, We approach with profound reverence tftat Agni, 

who shines in his own adorle when lighted up, who is evet-
young, the glorious illuminator, placed between the heaven 
and earth; the receiver of many precious oblations, and wl'to 
manifests himself on every side. Agni, who subdues all our 
vicious_ habits by his miglit, is praised by us as the origin of 
wealth; let him, when praised by us, preserve us from vice 
and reproach, and keep uncontaminated our sacrifices. Thou 
art Varu-9-a, (the absolver from guilt); thou art Mitra (our 
friend to aid in performing acts of merit). 0 Agni, the sons 
of Vas'ishtha extol, thee with hymns of praise. In thee let 
all wealth worthy of acceptance reside ; and do ye, (0 gods,) 
preserve us a all times with your prospering aids. 

10. The mighty lndra increases in might by the praises 
of Vatsa with the speed of a rainy cloud. When the sons 
of Kan,wa extol lndra, the prosperer of sacrifices, with' their 
songs-1,jteni thty may proclaim vain all the weapons of their 
foes,* While the common priests ar~ eagerly filling the 
vesaela1, raising them·,. and bearing away the produce of the 

• Or proc:laim the warrior lndra their brother, 




!!O\emn rite; the learned Br!h111a\1S serve lndra with a ~~ : 
of ·praise. · · ·i,;,, 

11. The quick.descending, deity-rejoicing strearttl'.''~· 
the purifyi11g, ( darkness).destroying, gold-coloured, radiance-
enveloped juice, are being distilled. The purifier, the molier' 
in fle!lt chariots, the most brilliant, by hht brilliant rays pas. 
sessed pf golden radiance, and accompanied by the Marud. 
gaiµ, (is being distilled.) 0 purifier, thou who art Ure boun- · 
tiful bestower of food, surround us 'by thy rays, sending to 
the celebrator of thy praise an illustrious progeny.* 

12. Sprinkle with water, (ye priests,) from your stationi, · 
the expressed moon-plant juice, which is the most exceHsnt" 
of all oblations, which, forwarded by men, travels thro~glt 
the midst of the waters, that moon-plant juice which the 
priests have expressed by the bruising-stones. He who 'is 
incapable of sustaining injury, whose smell is most fragrant;· 
when purified, drops down on every side from the goat'11,; 
hair strainer. When pressed, we, who mix thee with flout 
and the produce of the cow, sing joyous songs to thee, both 
when raised on high (on the strainer), and when mingled witlr 
the waters (in the vessel below). The juicy god, expressed 
that all may partake of him, the satisfier of the gods, the 
performer of sacred rites, the brilliant, the all-seeing, ffowg 
down. 

13. The shining, rain-dispensing, gold-coloured Soma, 
who, as a king, 'is worthy of being respectfully approached, 
has been expressed, and, raising his voice, proceeds to the 
liquid element (in the vessel below). When purified, thou, 
0 Soma, like a hawk, passest on throu~h the goat's.hair 
strainer, and takest thy seat on the water-containing re-
ceiving-vessel. 0 possessor of all wisdom, thou goest to the 
sacred place through love to the sacrifice, and like a horse, 
when washed, rushing to war, thou rusbest to the conftict; 

• Or bodily SICC!fl&~h. 




ADHYA1YA X, 

Slay our opponents, 0 Soma, · and· have compassion · on u,, 
when thou overshadowest the waters, and. goest to the sacred 
vessel.. · · ' 

q. · As the rays of light encompass the Sun, 10 do ye 
with' adoration encompass the vast treasure of lndra. When. 
e~r then he is manifested, all wealth will, by his· might, 'be 
produced; and as the (departed father receives) the portion 
( offered by the son), so shall we receive that wealth. Praise 
ye lndra, who gives to the sinless, and is the bestower of 
wealth: lndra's gifts bring' good luck. He throws his mind 
into the act of giving, nor will he refuse the petition of him 
who performs sacrifice. 

15, · 0 lndra, give us freedom from the power of those 
we dread. 0 possessor of riches, with the aids thou art 
capable of affording, do thou utterly slay all that hate and 
rise up against us. 0 lndra, lord of wealth, thou art in very 
deed the possessor of large treasures and delightful seats. O 
god of wealth, object of our praises, we, the pressers of the 
mo.on-plant, invoke thee. 

16. Thou, 0 Som&, art (the god) that flows down in a 
stream, the exhilarating divinity, the most mighty, and one 
who loves to bestow wealth. Do thou flow down pure in 
these our solemn rites. Thou, 0 Soma, when pressed, art 
full of an exhilarating spirit; thou art the sustainer of the 
sacrifice ; thou art most inebriating, the conqueror of multi-
tudes, and yet thyself invincible. Thou, when bruised by the 
stones, flowest forth uttering a sound, and bringing us re-
nown-procuring, foe-destroying might. 

17. 0 Soma, flow forth in a stream pure for the banquet 
"of the gods ; and, 0 most delightful god, sit down upon the 
receiving-vessel. The drops of thy water-seeking, swift-going 
juice raise in lndra a joyous exhilaration. H~ and the gods 
drink thee, the conferrer of pleasure, to obtain immortality, 
The pure, expressed, shining liquid, distilling hea,en and 
earth, the all-controlling liquor, forwards wealth to us. 




ADttYA'\'A )t, 

48. 1\e1 putjfy by mean11 of the goats .~ajr.,,~j 
desin.We, f!lld,eolour", ash-coloured god, whQ, hhA~( _ · · 
g8!" tnto at! ~he gods by his exhitaradng spirit. - 'l'lur, 
united, wave-pr~dudng fingers wash the renown•d brui. . ~Y,C 
stone, the belo~d of lndca. (0 Soma), thou art purllieif f~f · 
the dri&ling·of tndra1 the slayer of Vritra1 and that, ~pJred 
wit.It \llgour1 thou mayest bestow gifts upon the man -,.ho , 
sitt In the hall of oblation. t;\. 

19. 0 Soma, flow out pure like a horse washed, and;bf 
swift to procure us abundance of strength and wealth. Tbe,'.; 
pri,uera of the mo~-p!ants purify thy juice. 0 Soma, purif,'.. 
thy juice for the production of an exhilarating beveragi,. . 
and for stl',ngtbening nourishment. The priests consecrate, 
by sprinkling, Soma the newly•produced child (of the wate~), 
th11 gold-coloured, the shining deity, for the benefit of th~ 
gods, in the holy place. \ .. 

Jo, The gods assemble in presence of the newly-pro~. 
ducl!ld Soma, mingling with the waters, who destroys out .. 
foes, and is adorned with all becoming ceremonies. Let out 
voices raise Soma on high, who takes possession of the 
heart of lndra, as the mother rears her infant, 0 Soma, · 
object of our sacred hymns, rain down happiness for out 
.herds of cows, and milk out for us abundance of food, and 
fill up our reservoirs of water. 

21. Those who light up Agni with eagerness, and whose 
friend is lndra, ever-young, lay down the sacred grast in 
o,der, ,beginning at the east ;-whose bundle of fagots is 
lar~,* whose collection of hymns is extensive, whose club (for 
war4b1g off intruders) is massy, whose friend is Indra, ever• 
}'Oltng ;-who in battle subdue by their mipt the enemies' 
WM'nots, whose &lend is·lndra, ever-young. 

• TINN are GNll'ld lO IN of tW111tJ•11ne piec:u, anddu piece.• 
cubi& lon1, 

. ' 

19 




~DijYA'.YA '!Gf. 

' ·. 22. lndra the supreme, who is but one,. and wh<nn tto 
,orie dares• speak against, bestows wflth qn the .man who 
elers I sacrifice. . Whoever among men pressing the moon. 
pH!,ot sits down and attends on the service of the awe, 
inspiring lndra, to him Indra quickly sends might. lndra in 

, a·tnom~nt slays the man who will not provide the materials 
for sacrifice, as one would stamp on a rolled up snake, and 
at the same moment listens with the utmost attention to our 
songs of praise. 

23. The Sama Veda singers sing thy praise, th{! Rig, 
Veda chanters chant to the glorious Indra, and the Yajur 
Veda officiating priests extol thee, the performer of acts ol 
merit, (as dancers raise high} the pole (with which they 
perform their feats).* When the institutor of the sacrifice 
ascends the mountain-top (to pluck the plants}, and puts 
his hand to the solemn rite, then lndra, knows hi! 
design ; and the causer of rain, with his accompanying ' 
(1/{arut) hosts, shakes all things. Then, having yoked his 
long-maned, girth-expanding, rain-producing horses Harl, 
lndra, the drinker of the moon-plant beverage, comes to the 
hetring of our (praise-sounding) voices. 

iEnd of tlee Tentlz Adkyaya.] 

ELEVENTH ADHYA'YA, 

1. 0 most resplen~nt Agni, bring the gods to the 
institutor of this sacrifice, and do thou, as the officiating 
priest, purify it, and offer up th~ oblations. 0 all-wise pre• 
server of the body, forward to-day our most pleasant oblation 
to the gods for our presecvation. I invo~e in the present 
ceremony (Agni), who is extolled by men, the beloved, the 
sweet-tongued, the offerer of the oblation, 0 Agni, when 

• o,, as a JOod man raises the renown of his.family, The ambiguity 
here ia-h1 •va111'1m.' 




ADHYA'VA.' XJ, 

extolle.d ·by us, , bring to u11 • the gods in a most comfor~f!li · . . . " . ,,., 
hariot-·;. for thou art consecrated by men to be the 'in~it · 
he gods. • 

:,. Let the faultless Mitra, Aryam.1, SavjM, al1d BbM¥ 
:spectively send us at sun-rise whatever (we requirei . ·o. 
ccupier of excellent abodes. be thcu our powerful preserver; . 
•hen the givers of all gifts come, wh, take away all o~r' 
.ns. Truly ye, as lords of all, with your mother Aditi; , 
reside over all indestructible rites, and ye, the same 'lords;' 
,ossess vast treasures. 

3. 0 thunderbolt-wielding lndra,' let our songs delight ' 
oee; provide for us food, and utterly slay all who hate the. 
:r.ihm1q1,s. Do thou trample under foot the thievish tribes ' 
·ho offer no sacrifice; for thou art mighty, and like to thee · 

no one else. Thou, 0 Indra, art lord of the bruised and · 
nbruised moon-plants; thou art lord of all men. 

4.. The ever-wakeful, the instructor of the learned priests,. 
oma the purifier, has taken his seat among the sacrificial 

ladles; and the oblation-offering priests, in a united band,', 
lay hold on him with their minds bound up in their work, and 
bringing forward the offering in their propitious hands. He 
who is the purifier, the supporter of the sacrifice, goes into 
Indra. He fills both worlds, he destroys darkness. · The 
:Joyed things, sent by him, our beloved, tend to our protec-
tion ; let him send us wealth, as men support their servants. 
The increaser of all things, who is .imself ever-increasing,· 
the pure Soma, the rainer of felicity, preserves us by his 
radiance. Through him our forefathers, who traced the marks 
(of the stolen cows), and who knew all things, had -their 
minds strongly directed to the qjll in which the cows were 
concealed. 

S· 0 my friends, praise no other being than lndra ; why 
woul4, .. Y,~ <Jra,w og yourselves. destruction ? Praise 'IRdra,: 
tbe giver of rain, during the moon-plant sacrifice, and sing 
his sacred!hymns again and again. Pr~ise him, who, like·· a 




taging . b"U or fleet -.n-s\lhduil\g. heif,t,., ja ~uil4kl .. his 
, hat~, .fflP.ke5 hid~s faU down.Jn .fMbj~, ~-• ~s 

at1f pa,rdo11~ is worthy . Qf • ,all revere~ce, "nd p~u't~ 
a,wate and inanimate creation. . .;1, 
.. ··6: Ovr most pleasant tuneful voices rise aloft, at t,~• all • 

. . ~.qlltring1 wealth-conveying, indettr11ttible, food-detiring 
tbari4ts, As the singers, sons of Kar;,.wa, surraund t~e sac:red 

,, pj&ff, &11d the rays of light the Sun, so do the 110n& of Bhrig11 
~ompass that a-II-embracing Indra; and the men who 
are the sons of Priyamedha adorct him with hymns, raising 
~ii'.• voices. 

. 7. Do thou with all speed march to the war, and, inca, 
·. p•ble of being subdued, engage our foes ; for it is thou, Che 

destroyer of our debt,* that goest to destroy them that hate 
· IIB, 0 purifier, thou didst in the watery firmament create the 
Sun by thy might, and thou movest quickly towards us with a 
profusion of cows, and enlarged intellects. 

8, Do thou with all speed march, etc., (a.r hfor1 giwn.) 
() thou, shining divinity, exhilarating Soma, flow down pure, 
~o ~t us immortality, and a happy place of abode. Let 

. lndra drink, 0 Soma, of thy expressed juice; and let all 
the other gods drink of it, to obtain intelligeru:e and 

: strength. 
g. Like the rays of the Sun, the dripping, exhilarating, 

newly-produced, new-created, all-diffusing juice flows down 
on all sides:,through t~tretched out threads, and goes into 
no other place but into the belly of lndra. The mind of the 
singer lays hold on him, the sweet juice is sprinkled1 the 
elllhilarating .liquid produced, and forwarded to the centre of 
tile place where he sits. The purifying, all~xpansive, swecil 
juice of the moon-plant is eitpressed, and the swift god flows 
down ·through the goat's.hair strainer. · As when the bull 

I Jow11, the milch-cow runs towards him, so .these divine songs 

• Probably, 1h1 debt ol ,even,,' due by 111 to 1111' Ion. 




iDHVAIY.{, XII. 

gttlter tlOllnd t~ wel~purified vessel of divh'.ie ~t'II 
J.ico, while So~ prtllfll thtougb' the '."'h~ ~ 
strainer,' lnd is spread abrosd every wliere, for 'the: ~:" 
tion of the protectlng liquid, which ~t• ~- a · ~ciit ,' 
ntaiL · , , 

10. , 0 heroes, do ye give bir~h to Agni by ttle agenc)' of 
your fingers, who from the arani-wood faJl1 into tho hand• of 
men,* and is the illustrious far-seeing lord of familieat 'Tile 
priests, who have taken their places, maintai11 that Apr, 
pleasant to behold, in his recess, for our preservation from 
every danger ; and he, worthy of adoration and eternal, is 
ever to be found in his sacred abode. 0 Agnr, ever-young, 
shine forth with thy swift-ascending flame from thy ea.~tem 
recess ; for thou art a most brilliant god. Let Our' viands 
find their way into thy immortal substance. 

11. This all-moving radiance proceeds from the eut, 
and takes its seat in mother ea,th. Afterward1 the eyer. 
moving body proceeds to father heaven, Its rays •ov-, 
within man, and from the higher vital air extract and carry 
down the lower vital air,t and the same mighty god enlight~DS 
the firmament. The manifestations of the Sun in cny ,md 
night, by their radiance enlighten the thirty horal mansion&, 
and the voice (of our chanters) sustains the solar manifet• 
tati<ms. 

[End of tht Eleventh Adhy4ya.J 

TWELFTH ADHYA'YA. 

1. We, who approach the fauhless sacrifice, dlaat the 
sacred liturgy of Agni, who is celebrated by us, even when 
he is at a distance ; that anc'ient Agni, who rushes on the 

· • they obtain the fire by rapid friction from the wood, and n,q!ya 
it OIi cotton, or t!ax, lll'hlch they l\ofd In their hands. 

t Or thi• radiance move1 lrop, the height, of freawn to tll-e cfe.,eti, 
oftanll. 




1,50,, ' ADHVA'VA 

"en that would injure us, and preserves the ·property of 
those who oifer sacrifice. Let the possessor of all. happine~s 
preserve ·the wealth which we possess, and save us from' our 
sins.. Let, all living beings cele,brate that ,¼ni, who is the 
slayer; of Vritra (the cloud-shapetl demon), and who in every. 
baijle triumphantly carries off the wealth of the enemy . 

. 2. 0 shining Agni, yoke those well-trained fleet horses 
of thine, and let them draw hither thy splendid chariot. 
Come• into our . presence, and, regarding the offered viands, 
bring the gods to the feast, to the moon-plant banquet. 0 
Agni,' who layesf hold on the sacrifice, possessed of vast 
brilliance, indestructible, shine forth with thy brilliant all-
expansive radiance. 

3. Let not the murderous crew hear the dripping sound· 
of the sacrificer's nourishing liquid. Drive away that dog 
who supplies nothing for the sacrifice, as the sons of Bhrigu 
drove away (the dog) Makka. The companion of the gods 
diffus~s himself abroad in the holy place as a son leans on 
his parent's arms (for protection), and quickly moves to his 
seat' in the sacred receiving-vessel (Yoni), as a gallant pro-
ceeds to his paramour, or a husband to his wife. The mighty 
hero, the furnisher of strength, spreads himself over heaven 
and earth. The gold.coloured god, as some sacrificer in his 
own house, moves forward to sit down on the sacred Yoni, 
in the holy place. 

4. 0 !ndra, thou by thy birth art raised above every foe, 
so •constituted that no one can constrain thee ; and, without 
a fellow, yet thou choosest in their wars thy worshippers 
for 'thy brotherhood. Thou choosest not to ~dmit to thy 
friendship the rich miser, nor those drunkards who seek to 
make havoc. When thou but utterest the inarticulate sound 
of approbation, then thou bringest (thy wealth) along with 
thee, and we welcome thee with invitations, as we would 
(the manes of) a father. 

5. let the hundreds and thousands ol long-maned horses,· 
' ' 




that· belong· to· the all-perfect Indra, be ydked· to the Jolikti; 
chariot; and:bring him to the moon-plant banq11et. Let<rtJ!e 
peacock-tailed, white.backed pair of horses called Harl, ~~, . 
thee.in.a golden chariot to the drinking of tbe ,sweet1 higMy1 '. 
extolled liquor, and to partake of our viands. 0 teciplerit 
of praise, drink of this well-prepared liquid expressed juiee 
with the eagerness of the (Wind), who first drinks his portion • 
.This well-expressed pleasant juice is famed for its exhila• 
ting quality. 

6. Do ye press and sprinkle on every side with "°ater 
Soma, fleet as a horse, the object of our praises, the sender 
of water, the dispenser of radiance, who falls in drops like 
water, and mingles with the liquid element ; who flows down 
in ·a thousand streams, is the rainer (of blessings), is express-
ed like milk, and beloved by all the race of gods. The, 
glorious radiant divinity is produced from water, and increase• 
by water; (press out then) the mighty faithful one. 

7. Agni, who desires the sacrificial viands along with 
hymns of praise, who shines forth, is the brilliant divinity, 
and the recipient of oblations, destroys darkness, and all our 
enveloping foes. He also is the all-radiant guardian of 
father (heaven), resides in the immortal womb of mother 
(earth), and sits down on the womb of the sacrifice (on the 
northern Vedi or sacred enclosure). 0 thou who art ac-
quainted with the nature of all beings, and seest all things, 
bring us food, and progeny, which may be illustrious even 

1 in heaven. •'t 
8. The glorious divinity, who is purified by the pressure 

of the gold-ringed fingers,* brings his juice in contact with 
the gods, and, when pressed, moves all over the sacred 
strainer, uttering a sound like that of the invoker ofthe gods, 

• There must be four M ashas weight of gold made up into rings for 
, each Brahman who presse, the moon-plants, These ring• are not 
1rouodod, but flauencd like a new cart-wheel rin1, 




: lfl,_ .U,NVA'\tA JUI, 
h\; 

,~ • pee ,to die ll#ly..constructecl houe· wt.e · ·•• 
uiul is ~ for aacd6ce. Do tho11., die atipt; 011e; clad 
lit fll'llrll ·appate~ the far4eeing godi the eltoti.t of~ 
•~Mid again celebrate thy praise, tile purlfler; ·"4, 
~ e>f all thinp, tire ever-wakeful dMnity, enter 
WtvtieiJ the brwiiag planks for this divine banquet. The 
rptJt laattd am.id the• famed, he who extends over •II tlle 

· _.. the beloved, who is raised on the goat's.hair strainer, 
ls being purified for us, 0 sustainer and purifier, utter 011 

· eY9" lli4e thy voice, and ever preserve us by thy saving aids. 
g. Let 1111 praise quickly the ever•prosperous lndra, who 

.tia., M p,rifled (from the stain of the murder of the 
IUphuas) by the purifying psalmody and by the purifying 
.litur1M:11l by.m11s.* Let now Soma, who sustains all purifying 
,id,stam:ee, become bis delight, 0 purified lndra, come to 
Ml ~,elf purified, with thy purified assistant Maruts. 0 
purified drinker of the moon-plant beverage, establish us 
iD the pass.esak>n of wealth, and, when purified, enjoy the 
ittuMi., iiik.e. 0 lndra, when purified, thou bestowest on 
UII .w.iaa.th ~ when purified, thou givest the institutor of the 
aacniee IJis reward i when purified, thou slayest our foes, 
,nd lovttat .to send wi food. 

lo, We, who desire the sacrificial articles, and who lay 
hold on heaven, s.ing the merit-conferring psalter of the 
,ellf.ltndent Agni. Agni is the forwarder of sacrifices pet• 
~od in the wo.rld of man i let him accept our songs, and 
ll him convey the sacrifice to the family of the gods. Tl!ou1 
() Aini, erowest great on an sides, art our beloved one, 
AM IJ!>rthy of all praise ; for by thy aid the .sacrifice is 
~ed c:01J1plete in all it11 parts. 

· JI, Tbe voices of the priests are ·employed in praili.nr 
him, whp is wor-.bjpped _in tbe tbri!e daily 11ac:rikes, is the 

• -l'hm ,I.WO ,hr1111 Nier rapectively to th1 hyWII of ah■ . ·Bit IINI 
Sama VHu, 




ADHVA'V~ XII, 

rainer .of felicity, is the giver of food, and the loud-s011nd_i!'.).& 
divinity. Spreading over the· waters (in the receiving.vqssq1J~ 1 

as ,:Yaru-9,a -does ov~r the sea, he bestow1, most. desh-Jblt 
jewels. Do thou flow out pure, who art su,rrounded by t~~' 
brave and attended by heroes, art the subduer, the conqueror, , 

the receiver of wealth, the holder of sharp weapons, in- · 
vincible in war, and ever overthrowing t11' enemies in battle. 
0 performer of immense journeys, who procurest securi~y 
for thy worshippers, and makest heaven and earth happy, 

drop down pure, thou who lovest to meet the waters at the 

early dawn, when the Sun is in the meridian, and when the 

solar rays are departing, and summonest for us strengthe11-

ing food. 

12. 0 preserver of strength, u hen thou art joined to t~e 
holy So~a thou art most illustrious. Thou, Che invincible, 

the sustainer of men by thyself alone, slayest the indomitable 
R.\kshasas. We beg wealth of thee at the present time, of 
thee at all times, as the manes beg their allotted portion. 

Thy mansions in the heavens, 0 lndra, are as far extended as 

the voice of fame. Let floods of happiness from thee compass 

us around. 

13. We worship the deity who, even among the gods, is 
worthy of adoration, the inviter of the gods, the immortal, the 

carrier on of the sacrifice to perfection ; the preserver of 

liquids,* posses~or of brilliant treasures, the all-resplendent 

Agni, encompassed with surpassing radiance. Let him offer 

up the liquor that imparts delight t_o Mitra and VaruQa, in•the 
shining oblation-hall:t 

14. U Agni, let unfailing stores of provisions; come to the 
men whom thou protectest in the conflict and sendest to the 

wars. 0 destroyer of foes, nothing, not even the least 
thing, belonging to such a man, can be carried off, and hii, 

• Or- grandson of liquids, 'napatam,' nepot,m, 
t Or shining heaven», 

2Q 




~rengtb is ~eryWh'eYf 111.ltlous:"· Let'''the lord' of ·a'ff-~\\ 
~ ·o,i'r presm& in tbe wars tbrough means df ttoO)!l's ·ot 
h~'ties,,and let h1m bec:6n'l'e the bestbwer (lf all valuable things 
lflirougf( means ot the sacrifices of our feiihl~d 8rlhma);ls.:' 
., ,:ls: . Witch the ·ten united, purifying, sustaining s1siers 
{t~e · fingers) propel the mighty Soma, the gold,coloured 
·drippings ftow doln like the rays of the Sun, and spread 
themselves abroad in the receiving-vessel with the speed of 
a fteet horse. The deity-desiring, happiness-raining, much. 
praised moon-plant juice is laid hold of by the sacred water!!, 
-.s the child is by the mother, and tuns towards its prepared 
seat in the receiving-vessel, along with the produce of the 
·cow, with the eagerness a man does towards a woman. 
Truly Soma has drunk from the udder of the indestructible 
·tow, an«t, himself of sarpusing intellect, ftows down in many 
11treattts into one receptacle ; and the cows envelope the 
~upr~me divinity with their milk, as it were with newly. 
Washed garments. 
· t6. 0 lndra, drink to thy satisfaction of our sa\'Ollry press. 

·ed juice, mingled with the product of the cow. And when 
\Mu 'twt drunk, and art under the inftuence of the liquor, ac. 
howledge 111 by granting us prosperity, and let thy favourable 
\'egards protect \ls. May we, the providers , of sacrificial food, 
be kept in a good frame of mind, and not be left a prey to 
iour foes ; preserve thou us with all thy wondrous aids, and 
1teep· l!!I' evl!r in peace. 
• ·: 17. · The' twetity-one milch.cows* yield to him the true 
milk, in the superexcellent place of sacrifice it and th~ tour 
delightful liquids are produced for the purifying of men as often 
~'they· are brought to perfection in the sacrifice. the two 
'wlirlds are borne aloft by the hymns in praise of the purified 

• Most probably motces i ar th~ twelve months, five HIIOl'li, &bree 
werld1, 111d one Sun, 

t Or in the toity heavens, 




*•·· 
deJilW~ lTater of, Iii•;* &Rd ~ witlt his -.i,lit ~~ 
tltf el;t.i,oing . wat,rs, whenever the preparers of tb4 •~-
viapds ,e,nter t~ mansion o( the radiant god. Let the -•-• 
tillrf,. ~al, inextinguishable rays of light ~end to tllie p,;;.'. 
sef'Ylltioa of .the inhaaitants of the two worlds, and with tbea. · 
let Soma send down pure, streng'theniDg, divine nowisJr · 
m'"1t, and afterwards let hymns of praise rise to the ie;-
splendeot kinr. 

18. Do thou, the much-extolled, the p1uifier, appr~b • 
for the banquet of Vayu, or Mitra, of Varuq.a, and the hero 
Jndra, w~o is fleet as thought, stands in a chariot, is the 
producer of rain, and the wielder of the thunderbolt. 0 
divine Soma, favour us with garments to cover us well, atid 
with pure milch-cows, and with joy-bringing golden orna-
ments, a11d with horses fit for the chariot. 0 puri6er, -
down upon us all kinds of heavenly and earthly wealth; ~ .. 
through means of thee, may we gain p.:isses'>ion of weaka 
wc,rthy of Rishis, and such as was poss~sssed· by Jamadagni. 

19- 0 unequalled proprietor, who wast produced for the 
destruction or the RAkshasas, thou at one aad the samo 
time renderest habitable the earth, and raisest up the pillar• 
of heaven. On thy account Sd.Crifices were instituted, and 
the joy-causing hymns composed. Thou art the cred°' 
of all things that have been or are to be. Do thou, wb 
elevatedst the Sun in the heavens, infuse fertility into Ql.tr 
milch-cows. And do ye, our priests, warm the heart of hid~ 
thf J11Cipient of praise, with the well-polished hymns ol ~ 
grand- Sama, u others do with the affecting verses of· tits 
common Sama. 

20, As the adorable Soma, the causer of inebriating• 
detig,ht, flows into the vessel, do thou, 0 possessor ofi the 
horses Harf, drink and be· merry. The rainer (of blessing&), 

•· ~1111 'Dit111, l'he ~ 1hree liquiJs may be wat1r, milk, and' 
m.r&elt lMkr, 




the' shi~ing Soma, the 'nourisher, the giver of thott~n'ds-
gifts, is being prepared for the sender down ·of rain. -0 ' 
Indra, let' the exciting,. blessing-conferring, exhilarating, ex-
tolled;· aiding; adored, foe-destroying, immortality-conferring 
dra'ug_hts reach us. Thou art brave, thou art the giver of -
gifts; send us therefore the chariot of mankind (sac_rifice) to 
convey us to heaven. At the same time, all-subduing god, 
do thou burn up, as thou wouldst a wooden vessel, the wretch 
~ho neglects sacred rites. 

[End of the T'll!e(fth Adhyaya.] 

THIRTEENTH ADHYA'YA. 

1. 0 Soma, pour forth to us rain, even floods of water 
on all sides, in abundance, and large supplies of wholesome 
food. 0 Soma, flow forth in such a stream that the cows of 
the men (who are hostile to us) may come to our houses, 0 
most beloved of the gods, do thou in this sacrifice pour forth 
to-us water in a stream ; pour forth abundant showers of 
rain. Let (Soma) furnish us, in a full stream, with the pure 
liquid strained through the goats' hair, for consumption; and 
let the-gods hear the sound of his approach. The purifier, 
slaying the Rakshasas, and, as of old, shedding rays of 
radiance, comes down in showers. 

2. 0 priests, bring forth the liquor for the god Indra, 
who delights in quaffing it, who kn:iws all things, who moves 
around on .every side, who comes to attend at the sacrifice, 

· and moves forward at the head of the divinities. Do ye 
approach the drinker of the moon-plant beverage, the foe-
su9duing lndra, with vessels full of expressed, shining moon-
plant juice. When the priests approach lndra with the bowls 
of sltining moon-plant juice, the knower of all things, the 
attendant on sacrifices, the ·seizer of our enemies, sends 
whatever we desire. For him, even for him, 0 ye priests, 
bring the expres~ed nourishi1tg liquid, that we may never by 




ADHYA'YA:fUI, 151,' 

any' acc'fdent suffer the misery of subjugation to .an:y of tb,ose . 
our oppo~ents who seek to subdue us. · \t 

3. 0 sing a song to the yellow, ro~e-coloured Soma, ."':h?i' · 
subsists by his own might, and touches the h_eavens. Purifyt 
the Some juice expressed by the hand-impressed stones, and 
pour the s~eettmilk into the sweet spirit. Sit down to sing 
hymns of praise, mingle the moon-plant juice with the curdled 
milk, and introduce the sparkling liquor into the persoo of· 

Indra. 0 Soma, who providest for the gods the object of 
their desire, slayer of our foes, the all-seeing, pour down· 

felicity for our cattle. 0 Soma, searcher of the heart, lord· 
of the mind, thou art poured out for lndra for his drinking 

aoo exhilaration. 0 sparkling, purifying Soma, do thou, 
along with Indra, confer on us wealth, accompanied 11•ith 
bodily vigour. 

4. 0 mighty divinity, thou ever bringest with thee wealth 
well worthy of notice, art the rainer of felicity, the refuge of 
man, the fountain of beneficence. Let the invincible slayer of 
Vritra, who overthrew by· the might of his arm ninety-nine 
cities (for Divodasa), bestow on us wealth. Let lndra, our 
frie~d, the conferrer of happiness, milk out as it were for 
us in a full stream (the riches) which consist in horses, cows, 
and barley.* 

5. Let the glorious (solar) luminary drink the powerful 

spirit of the moon-plant liquor, and bestow upon the institutor 
of this sacrifice a life free from adversity. The luminary 
that is moved round by the aerial vortex, that preserves the 

world by its own might, and that nourishes all its inhabitants, 

and pours forth floods of light ; the glorious, mighty, all-

embracing, food-producing, unfading luminary, placed on the 

· • Observe here the principal articles of rural wealth at the time and ' • 
place when these hymns were written, There is no mention of buffaloe1, 
rice, or wheat, ao common now in India, 




'!around Qr tile beaYCll-$1JPaiioing c~~.t t"' 4"it'9-y.f_Rt,~-
., ;unfriendly, the slayer or foe5i t~.t~Jr,~lQr 9' ·t4,, il,~i-

®'1-.. tb~ destrQ.yei: Qr the Asur,s, ah,d tbe slayer· of .~11r . 
e11vioui kipdred, ha& ken mauifes~. Tbe a,11-su.q>iwlng, 
~ ~client lig.ht or lights, aU-co"4ueri.,. and wealtb-
p.r1,1~uring, is termed the Mighty Radiance,. 'l'be glorious,, 
radiaut, mighty Sun sheds abroad his attendant, ~ighty, i,n. 
<h!structiple inftuence, to give light to the world. 
· 6. 0 lndra, help forward our sacred rites, best~w on, us. 
,iiealth· witb the readiness a father bestows it on his son. 0 

. t~u, who art much extolled in this sacrifice, grant that we 
living creatures may daily see the light of the Sun. 0 bra,n 
hero., let not t~ ignorant, murderous, knavish bands ru11 us 
dp.wn, since we perform propitious rites. When alsQ w:e 
embark in boats, may we pass safely over man)( w.).t.eU• 
through thy aid. 

, 7. 0 Indra, save us day by day, to-morrow after to-
n;iorrow, and ever and anon. As thou, 0 protectot of holy 
men, daily preservest the singers or thy praise, so prese~ve 
thou us by night and by day. 0 brave hero, 4estroyer of 
foes, god of riches, and laden with wealth, who mixest the 
ju.ice that produces vigour, performer or many meritori11us 
acts, and rainer down of felicity, let both thy hands lay b1)(d 
on .the (Vajra) t~underbolt. 

8. We, desirous of wives, and desirous of sons, ever first 
to move to the sacrifice, the· givers of distinguished gifts, 
invoke (Sa~aswan) the god Oceanus. Also let (Sara1rwati}· 

. the river goddess, beloved above beloveds by the se~n.tola, 
sisterhood,t the much-extolled goddess, be ~raised by us. 

9. We meditate on the adorable light of the divine 

• The reader must turn to the Ptolemaic astronomy here for an-
o\lject ol cornp~rison. But the Hindu writers s~,111 ac.1111lly. to hM't-
thouaht ol 111 111.uerial circle, 

t The &even rivers; or lhe seven musical cadences, 




AbHVA'tNI kilt. 

• 
"l'fbl, 'Let "bn·, dk'ect out 1111clerstandi1tg1. .o_,., . wt,·•, 
suttaintd by teh rnq,erexcelleflt provisions, furnished \U!l.~. 
tlie respfeml~nt Sun. May he prosper.our eacred rit#•, · 

( Som411am--gi1H11 6ifore.] 
10. {AgN a)fl-befort. 1'a,ial sbdtan-hfiw,,l 't(l) 

Mitra and Vah11,1a, twin gods, who are without hate an·d 
-always prospering, do ye encompass the much-desired, 

mighty performers Gf sacrifice for the purpose of obtain-
ing water. 

r 1. 0 ye who dwell ia the rainy skies, who cause · the 
waters to flow down, ye who are the lords of food, famed fbr 
-libera.lity, tlo ye ascend your mighty chariot. The inhabit-
ants of the three worlds bind, by their sacred ritea, 
(lndra in the form of) the Sun, Fire, and Wind. The 
stars MIG 'that shine in the heavens (are but forms of 
fodra).t ' _. 

u. These beloved, well-paired, powerful, hero-conveyiiif, 
bay horsa Harl are being yoked to the chariot. 0 he~, 
thou art every day manifested with the rays of the morning, 

imparting life to the torpid, an.d giving form to the shapelees 

masses of beings. 

13. 0 lndra, this moon-plant beverage is expressed for 
thee, and for thee is· strained out pure ; therefore do thciti. 

•drink of it. It is thou that formest the shining moon•plant; 

which moves with a horse's flt:etness, and thou that ove11-
shadowest it, that it may produce Lhe strengthening, exhilara. 
,ting draught. He, the mighty god, like a chariot conveying 

fatge treasures, brings them to confer them on us. At such ll. 

time let all the works produced by men, which tend to exal-
tation, meet in the awful heaven-conferring conflict.t 0 

• These are two translations of the famous Gl(yatrl, The latter is 
most probably the· nearer to its original meaning. · 

t ln'theie bold additions I havt but followed the Bhashya, 
t T• conltct 'rija' (or •baja') is either a eacrifice er a baule. 




ADHVA'VA X!'ll, 

• <tnnferrer of strel)gth1 strain out for us strensth like that,of the 
Maruts, like that of the.spotless heav,nly,hosts, ,or like ,,thllt 
of ~aters rushing rapidly, Become to1 us the purifier of the 
mind,, 0 thou who art manifested in a thousand streams, and 
de~~ed worthy of receiving a share in the sacrifice, as well as 
,t,bc '1!bduer of armies, 

14. , l'hou, 0 Agni, hast been consecrated by the gods to 
, be the oblative priest for all the sacrifices performed in the 
world of human beings. Thou satisfiest with out exhilarating 

· 'Oblations the objects of our adoration through the medium of 
thy (flaming) tongue, Thou both conveyest the gods to us, 
and presentest our offering to them. 0 Agni, thou art the 
institut-or and carrier on to perfection of all merit-conferring 
•rites. Thou art intimately acquainted with all the roads 
and paths_ of sacrificial rites ; therefore ( do thou conduct us 
through them). 

15. , The offerer· of oblations, the gift.conferring, the 
immortal (Agni), who lead5 by his practical wisdom into the 
.knowledge of all objects of science, presents himself at the 
very commencement of our, ceremonies, This powerful 
warrior is the subject of meditation in our wars; and i_n our 
,sacrifices is first put in his sacred recess, and then, as officia-
ting priest, is the provider of all the materials of sacrifice . 
. Established by our consecratory rites, (Agni,) tbe object of 
-our adoration, sustai11s the womb of Being; and the daughter 
of Daksha (the consecrated ground) sustains him, her pro-
tecting father. 

, 16. Do ye sprinkle the clarified butter mixed with milk 
.on (Agni) the ~upporter of heaven and earth; and lay hold 
(qf the gilts) of the rainer of felicity in the midst (of his) 
plea~ant feast). As cows know to go to their own homes, as 
calves follow along with their mothers, and as sisters go paired 
with their brothers, so all the sacrificial viands prepa,ring for 
consumption proceed through the ~ir to lndra and Ag~i, and 
are about to fall into the jaws of the all-consuming deity. 




· t?)\:Tbat primeval (etsenee &t9nt) bas In 1teelH'1'l( 
111•i11ente amid all w~rlds; Frettt it fife all-inspiting 'nMt 
S11n* was produced. He, when he! manifests himself1 . ~ 
stroys our foes., and all creatures find joy in ,reposing in hint, 
He who increases in might, is of great strength; and. t8e 
slaughterer ( of the wicked), inspires fear into his sla\lish · 
(foes). He also is the purifier of all animate and inanimate 
tteatures. Wheh irl thy merry moods, all the creation t~u 
uplioldest stek i1 tefuge in thee. All the satisfiers df tile 
gdds With sacrifices cause their wor1,s to centre In tfl~ti i 
therefore they become double and triple (by obt~in'fng wiv&s 
and sons). Create, 0 lndra, through pleasure, att (heir) 
pleasanter tha:n all pleasant thing~. Also, when greatltei-
hilarated, do thou sport for us thtough sweetness a sriet 
(babe).t 

18. 0 venerable, might.possessing, self-satisfying 'liii'rl-li, 
do tfiou drink to the full extent of thy desire, albng with 
Vishl,lu, the moon-plant juice mixed with barley, on the Tri• 
kadra days. It was the mighty Soma truly that raised t'J\e 
spirits of the all-glorious lndra for the performance of his 
mighty work, the slaying of Vritra. May he, tha:t same faith-
ful fndu, now surround that same divine faithful lndra. b 
lndra, thou wast born endued with merit, and by thy migllt 
thou carriest round the world ; thou art powerful by thy i~-
berent power, thou art great in might; thou art the sulrdaer 
of foes, the omniscient god, possessed of much wisdo·m, the 
bestower of the much-desired wealth on the celebrators bf 
thy praise. May the same divine faithful lndu (Soma) en-
compass all around that same faithful lndra. Afterwards the 
brilliant lndra by his might slew in war Kravi, and agai~ 
tendered prosperous heaven and earth, after (that Rakshas) 
llad filled them by his power. lndra receives info his own 

1 

• The Bhashya says 'Surya' mt1u1s here lndra. 
t 1b, bl,tlsli1a .. ads 'mithuna,' but I pitier the obicurit) of die ori&io.al 

JI 




,½itilty rine-ha1f (of the moon-plant lie.-erare, 'and :slh-dsnbe 
. othet' to the 1godsr. May the same divine faithfot•tnalt·en. 
•compass the same faithful Indrw. 

[End fJj tkt Tkirteentk Adhyaya.] 

FOURTE£NTH ADHYA'VA. 

,'I, Celebra:te, in songs of praise with the greatest atten-
' 'tion, Indra the lord of cattle; for he is capable of apprecia. 
'bing, your 'Services, is the son of the sacrifice,I and the pre. 

,..ael"Ver• of h9ly men. Let the gold-coloured shiniRg horses 
of lnara present themselves on the sacred grass, where we 
are praisin~ lndra. The cows let down their sweet milk to 
be mingled with the ml!>en-,plant juice, for lndra th,e holder 
ol the thunderbolt, when thr. liquor is brought from all sides 
into his presence. 

2. Do ye set in elegant array our sacrificial viands, and 
, 'the li<iuors for the sacrifice1 before the oblation-receiving 
lndra, in every 'Contest in which he is engaged. 0 slayer 
·of Vfitra,• most excellent handler of the bow-string, who art 

. made propitious by praise, (fulfil our desires.) Thou art the 
fl'incipal giver of wealth, the all-faithful, the possessor of 
ce,lebrity; we therefore ask what becomes the majesty of 
the possessor of ab1rndant treas11res, and the son of mighty 
stt'eilgth. 

3. The heavenly inhabitants milk out of the mighty 
firmament the ancient liquor praised in by-gone ages, .and 
with their eyes turned to lndra extol the newly-produced 
(juice). Afterwards those divine all-seeing Vasurach praise 
their relation (Soma) before the shining Sun has dispelled 
th!el darkness. A~d thou, 0 purifying Soma, becemest. the 
ornament of heaven and earth, and of all creatures, through 
. thy glorious might, as a bull is of the herd of cattle amid 
which he is stationed, 

• On m'ount ol the love he bea~s it,-Bhtishya, 




4-. · Agni.•do thout,rihout fail rep:at amo!)g ~he;•~\~ ( 
dC1r,oblatio11-accompanying new hym·n {)f praise, proclaJ~ 
fle&r thy eastern receis.• 0 .\gtii, possessed of varie.J •P~"" 
dour, thou art the distributor of wealth ; anid as a wave · .of 
the sea opposite to the mouth of: a river sends into it · a. 
portion of its waters, so now thou rainest happineBS OD the 
institutor of a sacrifice. Do thou dispense to us provisions 
from the highest heavens and from the regions of micJ;afr, . 
and 11estow O{l us t&e wealth of this lower wodd. . 

5. , am the person who in verity lay hold of the inteHecti, 
of the preserver of sacrifices ; I have an origin resplende~ ... 
as that of the Sun. Born like Kaijwa: in ancient da.)'$,. I , 
adorn lndra with my songs of praise, excited by which he: 
puts on his mighty strength. There are those who make no 
effort to please thee, and there were Rishis who pleased thee 
perfectly ; do thou, when fully praised by me, (who belong· h," 
neither class,) manifest afl thy greatness. 

6. 0 Agni, do thou with all thy attendant fires accept : 
of our strength-conferring oblations, and with aU the fit'ej 
which exist among gods and men, favourably receive our 
hymns of praise. May that Agni, to whom the priests make 
oblations, with all his attendant fires come into our presence, 

. surrounded with stores of provisions for ourselves, our sons, 

and our grandsons. Do thou, 0 Agni, with all thy attendaa 
fires raise aloft our hymns of praise, as well as our sacrifices: 
Do thou send us (virtuous men), for the offering of libations 
to the gods, and conferring on 11s wealth. 

7. 0 primeval Soma, that sitteat.·on the matting of cut 
Kus'a grass, the sacrificers inspire.thee with a mind to bestow 
large stores of food and might. 0 hero, inspire us with . 
heroism. Thou art cut for the sa'cri~cial nourishing bever-
age, like some inexhaustible reservoir of water, or like wat~r 
,by the fingers of the hand of him that lifts it. 0 immortal 

• Tile A'h1va11fya Kunda,-Bhuhy11, 




·,._a), ~; ...._.tJ fOII m1$la diio·•• '"i ·palQIOl 
tbat -:bppl¥'ta, tillo iJIUDGda.!,.•gaauililt,,·--.;oiri• --.. 
aao.~u-ctonun.ually, wait6'l o,e, the saoafictt-hanuD§gGdt 
wub•~ereaco,to our wam. ' ' '• ,ll/,, 

.. · &. ' 'Distil tlhe sparkling liquor for lndra, let binr drink ef 
the· sweet moon-plant essence ; for it is he who by his ~ht 
si:Qd!! you wealth. I celebrate the lord of- the horses tfat'f, 
the· giver· of wealth ; let him now hear the praise of the son 
of·As'wa who extols him. 0 thou primeval god; no·one wu 
e\let'produced equal to thee in heroism, no one is COR?parable 
t~· thee for wealtll, nor for affording protection, nor for gra-
ciolis)y ~cepting our songs of praise. 

9. Thou, (0 my host,) clesirest the P,roduce of the 
c~w; th,erefore (I cal,I on). the producer of the morning 
ray~, who causes thr waters to resound when they qiingle 
together, the pr~tector of (the cow), the animal it is criminal 
to,i~j)li:e. 

~I>• ."t. t~ divine (Agni), the giver of wealth, desire 
t~- loPg la(jle (s'ruk) with ~ts full liquid oblation, Pour ye 
oQt, 611 ye up ; fo{ in verY. deed the divine (Agni), 1:i.ears 
YQ\I qp, The god11, const.itutcd the intellect.-confer{ing i\g,ni, 
th,,1il)Jit#. t~ sacr~es,,apd bearer away of oblations. Agni 
ga je¥411ls, ac;com(?a,nied with heroes, to the mil,n who 
O~el'• ~p6ce, ll,tcor4lng, to the i11,5tituted mQ®. 

11. Let Agni, who knows all the roads, in whom al-I• 
sacred rites centre., manifest himself ; and let our songa fihd- , 
their way to Agni, propitiously brought into being, and tlhe 
proaperer of men of priestly 1-miHes. Since mortals tremble 
at'tbe performers of sacre4 rites, do ye in this sacrifiee.' wor• 
ship·· with oblations, with all your (powen; ~- Agni the, p.er. 
of',thousands of, gifts. Agni, when hailed,by- ~saiwith. 
his mighty voice, did not leave the· gods to wa• •ut, 
mother· earth, but· (collecting them} brilliaat- and- gl9A8li& 
left hii. house: in th, beavna. . 




' ~-.,,.,h Ar~ .hfo;,1,} ': We,, kk W!lti.> t~ : 
caltr-:Qlkm;·Apii' ,Mlei u. tattoHed b:,:,tbe, mlghti)J .gadlli:~-'.._. 
Agai,ir all',.seeing, ·is the, puri6er; the protedor- of· the:_, •. 
t~II, ancl the ftr.st con11ecrated1 and ,put in, his sacreci •~ 
0 Agn~ performer of holy acts, pour out for us glory .114• 
CQllpllaied with might, and give us wealth an.d. provisions. 

r3. 1 0·purifying1 shinin,g Agni, with thy brilliant ex~ 
rating tongue bring hither the gods, and'impart to,thelll' ~ 
oblation. 0 thou · who art fed by melied butter, and ~tl 
poss~ssed· of surpassing radiance, we desire thy prese~~ 
for thou· art the observer of all things. Bring- thou the ~• 
to the banquet. 0 all-wise Agni, we light up in this sacf,I:. 
fice th'T, who delightest in oblations, and ar.t a resplende'll 
mighty divinity. 

14. 0 Agni, the object of o6r adoration in all sacred 
rites, into whom the continued flow of hymned verses enters, 
save us by thy protecting aids. Save us, 0 Agni, bring us 
wealth, the destroyer of poverty, worthy of being extolled, 
and which can never be taken .from us by foes in any war. 
0 Agni, bring to us for our sustenance heart-deligl\t-int' 
wealth, the producer of happiness, and which will last al&; 
our lives. 

15. Our sacred rites urge forward Agni (to the sacrific~J 
as (horsemen) a fleet horse into the wars.• Through him m~i' 
we acquire by conquest every species of wealth. 0 Agni;. · 
send us such sufficient aid from thee, as thereby we may obtaiBl-
herds of cows ; furnish us also with .thy aid for the &C'fll& 
tien of wealtb. 0 Agni, bring from, heaven great. and e'ter-
increasing wealth, accompanied with horsea and cows; illumi,.. 
nate the heavens, and fight against our foea. Q Agni, t'1ou.i 
ca•aedat the ever-moving, immortal Sun• to, t.ake his,pJae_er 

,.,_ THe filur castei, and· the stilt' more degr11ded 0 lfib& of ,._,,-~ • 
or 6afl'dhi1Pvu, P-itar-, Dev .. , Aauraa, and1 R1U,~l.aau ;. or pd•,._, 
6'andhar1as, A pllllrU, a11d eerpcnlS, 




AS>llVA'YA 'ff~ 

Mt- in tl\e ~avel'II, that· he migtit give llgl,t :to the IIOnf 
of: men, 0 Agni, thou art, the enMgbtenflf<iqf aV;:i-tftt--
most belov.ed,' ,who slttest , · chief , at our · (sacrifices), 
Ho11our with thy regard (ottt hymns), and supply the singers-
with food. 
, 16, 0 Agni, thou art the head of the gods, over-top-

ping the heavens, resembling the eminence on a bullock's-
shoulders ; the lord of earth, the inspirer of delight into· 
all animate and inanimate beings. 0 Agni, lord of heaven, 
thou art the lord of wealth, worthy of being praised and. 
of being bestowed. It is thou that bestowest happiness, 
let me then be the celebrator of thy praise, 0 Agni ;. 
thy pure, white, shining rays urge onwards thy brilliant 
flames. · '· 

[End"/ tke F!urteentli Adliyaya.]' 

FIFTEENTH ADHYA'YA. 

1. Who, among men, 0 Agni, is worthy of being_ 
reckoned thy brother ? tor' who else can acceptably offer 
thee sacrifice ? Who knows thy )essence, or where thy 
secret abode is? Thou, 0 Agni, art the brother, the friend,, 
the beloved of us men. Thou as a friend art worthy of 
belng praised by op friends. Offer thou up our oblations. 
to Mitra and varu1,a ; offer to the rest of the gods the great 
sacrifice, and for this purpose proceed to thy own- sacred 

recess. 
2. ne who is worthy of a~ praise and of being adored. 

by all,· the foe of darkness, who is to be reverently approach-
ed, the rainer of felicity, now shines forth. Agni, the rainer 

· of 'happiness, who like some ho1&e conveys to us the gods,, , 
now sKines forth ; him tlie offerers of sacrifice praise •. 
Q . rainer · of felicity, we, the rainers down of offerings, 
make· thee, the causer of rain, tlu: .brill.iant Agni, to shine 

. ferth. 




.s, ,.Q .. l'adi.ant .Ag~i,,.~y rnight.y., b1iUianl¥; w~.l!i•r< 
precee.jl upwards. , 0 , mueh-desired, Agni, let · our1. ;_lon~ · 
scooped ladles, . holding mJlte4• butter, • entef' , thee, ... atJc:l 
honour with acceptance our oblations. I praise I Agni,-,~ht, 
exhi1arator, the inviter (of the gods), the receiver of the 
offerings, who is possessed of varie;d radiance and brilliant 
tr~sur~: let him listen to our song, 

, 4. Save us, 0 Agni, by one sacred song ; s:,.ve us also hy 
two. 0 lord of food, save us by three. 0 appointer, of Ollt 
place of abode, save us by four. Save us, 0 Agni, from every 
miserly Raksha,s; protect us in our battles, for we s11m1un!il 

thee, who art always most near to us and our brot~e~1 
to aid us in our oblations to the ,gods, and to promote· our 
prosperity. 

5. Thou, 0 brilliant king, art regarded as lord, as the 
only one who has access to the gods, as the radiant divinity, 

the terrifier of foes, to procure the prosperity of thy worship-
pers, and of illustrious birth. The possessor of all know-
ledge comes while it is yet night, displaying his white radi-

ance. When he subJues the black retiring (night) with his 
radiance, bringing to light the virgin daughter of the mighty 

protecting luminary, he then moves along with his heaven. 

enveloping rays, and shines forth, planting on high the solar 

radiance. The prosperous venerable Agni comes to promote 

our proitperity, and afterwards, as the dest~oyer (of darkness), 

goes to his sister's abode. Agni, standing forth with his 
enlivening heavenly beams and white-coloured rays, oppose·s 
the nocturnal darkness. 

6. 0 Agni, son of fuel, ant great-grandson of sacrifii;ial 
food,* with what hymns shall we fully prai~e thee, the famed 

destroyer of foes? 0 son of strength,t whll,t kind of divinity~ 

• 'fhis genealogy is lhus reckoned in llu, Bha,hya. Oula1ions pro-
cure rain ; rain nourishes 1tees ; from wood, Agni, or fire ia procured 
by friction, 

t i.,., produced by the strong arms of the priests, 




:,teY.ering•fferittgs •n 'We t,t'e8et\t1 'Rhen WI! efe,t 11p' 'this 
byRtn of adoration? Do.thou aft~ard• caue,all out'~t11 
of:.pn;i~ to procure for us desir:tite places of altode, and lead 
uftlted wltb wealth, · 
• . ,7, · 0 Agni, coltle with thy attendallt flres; for •• ltfflg 

for thee, the in,iter (of the gods). Let the obtation held 1by 
the priests) sprinkle thee, the object of our worship, on t6y 
seat on the 111.Cred grass. 0 son of strength, descendant of 
Angiras, the long ladles run to thee during the sacri~; 
and we pray to Agni, the great-grandson of food, 
possessor of shining hair; all-sufficient during the sacred 
rites. 

8. Let our hymns of praise come bef6re the g11d 
possessed of consuming radiance, worthy of being respect-
fully approached, and let our sacrifices, offered with adora• 
tion, enter· thee, die pose~sor of much wealth, and the object 
of many hymns of praise for our protection. We pray to 
Agni, the son of strength, the parent of wealth, that he may 
give us atr valuable possessions ; to him, who appears in a 
double character, as an immortal god, and among men as a 
highly-excited performer of sacrifice amid the priests. 

9. Agni, who is the leader of all the tribes of men (in 
the paths of religion), who is quick (to aid his worshippers), 
and Hke a chariot {to carry away the offerings), and always 
produced anew (from the ar,g1.i-wood), is incapable of being 
slain by any one. The man who offers sacrifice obtains 
food by means of the bearer away {of oblations), and a l'lace 
of abode from the god posw,sed of pure radiance. Agni, 
the subduer of all our leagueafoes, and the nourisher of the 
immrirta.l gods, is possessed of immense stores of provisions. 

10, Let ,\.gni, when he receives provisions, be propitiolls 
to us; let our gilt be propitious, let our Sacrifice be propitious, 
and our bfmns of praise be propitious. Ma.ke our mind 
propitious aniid the assault of our foes, so that thQU mayeit 
by us conquer in war. Subdlle the llll&I?] irm bands tf· our 




ADHYA'lfA XV. :~ 

"'PP~nentis, ·sine~ we wor!V)ip thee to obta:in -t~ ob~\,.of ,,it'. 
deJi1'1!S, , . . . , , :. ' /J,,• ,; 
.. •, u. Q. -A.gni, son of strength, parent·of wealth, l~of 
provisions conjoined with cows) give to us abundance d(! flld~. 
He, •thl! resplendent divinity, the assigner to us of a place of 
,bode, the all•wise) the god celebrated by our voices, accom-
panied by many delight-inspiring flames, shines forth to us, 
as ,the conferrer of provisions accompanied with wealth. 0 
resplendent Agni, cast down (the R.akshasas by thy auxil~-
ries) in union with thy own might, and do thou with thy fiery 
mouth burn them up one by one. 

12. All men who desire food (adore) the much-loved 
Agni, our beloved guest : I too, for the obtaining of felicity, 
t'mploy my voice in praising Agni with hymns, who has been 
:set . up .in your house. The men who offer sacrifices extol in 
hymns of praise him who offers the clarified butter to the 
gods, as they would to a friend. We praise Agni the parent 
of wealth, who lauds (the institutor of ~:u:rifin:s 1, and who 
in these solemnities sends lorward to lwavrn the prepared 
offerings. 

13. I praise in this sacrifice with an enkindling. voice 
the enkindled Agni. I urge forward him who is himself 
pure and the puritier of others, aud stable as the pole. I 
worship with delight-inspiring hymns the pos~essor of 
wisdom, the inviter of the god,, who is extoll1!d by multi-
tudes, and without malice; the all-wise god1 who is intimate-
ly acquainted with ev~ry living creature. 0 Agni, gods and 
men have consecrated thee &if. afler age, thee as tl1e herald 
of the gods, the immortal, tGe offerer of oblations, the pre-
St'.rver, the god who oug~t to be extolled, and have wor-
shipped thee as the ever-wakeful, the all-pervading, and the 
lord of men. 0 Agni, who renderest glorious both worlds 
during the performance . of our rites, thou goest backwards. 
;ind forwards through the two worlds as the messenger of 
the .god~ : ,1ti11ce, therefore, we apply ounelves to sacrefi 

22 




f1ll'' A-DHYA1YA )WI. 

rites aad·sacted ·hymns_ be thou manifested as the proAperer 
of these three habitable regions (of earth, air, and he~ven), ' 

14. Our 11ister voice&, raised for the benefit of the offerer, 
celebrating thy perfections, rise in thy presence, whilst thou 
art, blown up by the wine!. The (aerial) waters touch the 
seat of him. who sits on the three-jointed sacred grass, first 
bo,ind and then loosed. The seat of the resplendent rainer 
of felicl\y is to be religious! y guarded by our friendly pro. 
teetion, and the appearance of Agni is to be adored with the 
s&llit reverence as the Sun. 

[End of the Fifteenth Adhyaya.] 

SIXTEENTH ADHYA'YA. 

1. 0 lndra, mortal men invite thee with their hymns to 
come to re.-eive the first draught of the moon-plant liquor. 
The 11nitPd Rihhus r1+brate thee, and the Rudras sing to 
ther, the primeval divinity. lndra increase3 the 3taminal 
vigour oi the institutor of this sacritice, through the drink-
ing of the expn'~st'd juic", so that his whole frame heing-
cxhilaraterl, men praise the might of lndra now as they did 
in former days. 

:a. 'I he hymning, sin~ing priests, skilled in sacred song, 
worship lndra and Agni, I, too, extol them to obtain pro-
visions. 0 lndra and Agni, do ye suddPnly by one blow 
overthrow the ninety slavish foe-proterting cities. 0 Indra 
and Agni, the priests who lay hold of the moon-plant j~ice 
by way of oblation employ 1themsrlves in our solemn rites. 
() Indra and Agni, ,trength and food which mutually produce 
one' another are with you, and in you also are stored up 
supplies of water. 

3, 0 lndra, hu~band of S'achi, come with all thy aaxi-
llary (Man1ts) to btttow on 11~ the ohjed of our desire; for, 
O mighty hero, we worship thee, that renowned I divinity, 
!ho in best~wing is equal to &rtune. 0 divi11icy, it is thou 




ADHYA1YA XVI, 

that ·satisfieat us with horses, and 1,estowl!st on u, --.l~Qt1 
of _CC)WI; thou art the golden, the joyous divinity. ·With· 
thee' the~ is flo lack of gifts ; bring to us whatevt'r we a,k. 

4. · Do in vety deed come for the benefit of our claihkfP, 
and possess thyself of wealth to bestow on us pecuniary aid. 
0 lndra, possessor of wealth, rain down on us who de1ire 
cows, and on us who desire horses, (the objects of our deeire.). 
0 lndra, thou bestowest"on the institutors of sacrifice many, 
hundreds and thousands of herds of cattle. We, who sing 
at the top of our voices thy praises to procure thy aid, bring 
thee, the destroyer of cities, into our presence. 

5. The inviter of the gods, the 'joyful Agni, is the 
bestower of all the wealth that men possess. As the first 
goblets of moon-plant liquor are drunk up by him, so let the 
same Agni drink in our praise. 0 lord of all, worthy of 
being reverently approached, the bestowers of oblations who 
desire the favour of the gods adorn thee with praises, as 
men would adorn a chariot-horse. Rain down then both, 
on our sons and grandsons the wealth of the wealthy. 

6. 0 Varu~a,, hear this my invitation, and have m~rcy 
on me ; ,for I, desirous of thy aid, especially address thee. 
0 rainer of felicity, what is thy preserving march with which 
thoo comest to make us joyful ? and what is that with 
which thou comest, bringing gifts to him who chants th,-
praise? . 

. 7. We, his worshippers, call upon lndra to the banquet 
of the god~, on lndra while the sacrifice is providing, and ow 
lndra when it is terminating. ,_We call on Indra to bestow 
on us wealth. lndra, by the greatness of his might, stretched 
out the heavens and the earth, and made the Sll'll ascend to 
his place. In Jn.dra all beings centre, and the goblet• oE 
moon-pla~t liquor find in him a place. 

8. (0 Vis'wakarma,*) creator of all things, who .di<bt 
• k may be questioned wh11ther Vi•'wakarma bo nut ratlaer aft_. 

ol lndra than the 10d of that name, , •, , 




1rrive at thy elevation through the' performance of '.sacrificti, · · 
do thou in my person pe'rform tl1e service' of this cotl8eotlted• 
(Agl'\t}.' Let all other men bef~I themselves, but let hidra 
be present with us, the bestower of riches, and the conductor 
to beaten . 

... g.. (Soma) the purifier, by his gold-coloured 11parkling' 
stream and accompanying rays, destroys all who hate us, as 
the Sun by his beams (the hateful darkness). The stream 
of the sprinkled moon-plant is all-luminous ; and the gold. 
culoured purifier, who with. his extolled sevenfold mouth 
and rays encompasses all the starry bodies, becomes radiant. 
The- knowing Soma moves to the glorious eastern region ; 
and his divine, reverently-to-be-approachl'd chariot comes 
along with the solar rays, even his reverently-to-be-approach-
ed chariot. The sacred hymns uttered by men come up to 
Indra, and rejoice the conqueror; and the thunderbolt at 
the same time comes to his hand. Be ye then, (Soma and 
Indra,) invincible in the battle, ever invincible. 

Jo. It was thou, 0 Soma, who in reality found out the 
treaSt1re concealed by the Pa.l).i,* by means of the supporting 
maternal waters used to aid in the sacrifice, in thy own 
abode, even in thy own abode. As the voice of the singer 
of the Sama is heard at a great distance, so is the sound of 
tbe bruising-stones, in which those that lay hold of them 
greatly, delight. Meanwhile the brilliant Soma with his 
three-world-sm,taining shining rays sends us food,-yes, 
sends us food. 

11. Confer on us for our preservation an intellect for 
ebtaining cows, horsl's, food, and heroes . 

. u. 0 (Maruts), heroes possessed of substantial might, 
grant his desire to tht: hymning, sweating, moving c~anter. 

' • It wos lndra properly who found tl,e cows, the treasure here 
alluded to.;. but l•e had drunk the Soma juice, or he could not hue per• 
fom1ed 1hat feat. · 




ADHYA1YA 'XVf • 
• 

ij. ' May the sons of immortality' hear our songs' and tit' ' 
propitio1ts to us. · ,,•:, · 

14,"· We cause our high praises to centre in youf' ~rint.ti 
heavens an<I earth, and approach for the purpose of praiili~-
your pure 1divinity). Ye two, with your persons, anc\'ll~ 

with ydur might, purify both the sacrifice and ~acrificer, a11d · 
eveh offer up the oblation ; ye, the mighty ones, furnish out 
friend (the singer with what he desires). Ye preserve and' 
supply food, and are the support of the sacrifice. 

r5. (0 [ndra,) this (moon-plant juice) is for thee, and 
thou approachest it as the pigeon does his mate. On accoun~· 
of it, also, thou regardest our songs of praise. 0 hero, lord 
of wealth, who art extolled by our voices, whose fame is as 
we have celebrated it, thy magnificence and thy glory com~ 
bine es:cellence with substantialness. 0 performer of many:· 
merit-conferring acts, stand over us for our preservation in-
this conflict ; at the same time we seek thy counsel in aU 

our affairs. 
r6. Ye givers of milk, approach the mighty hero (lndra); 

for during the sacrifice the reward-conferring (cow and goat's 
milk) are to be furnished in abundance to the i,:od, both of 

whose ears are adorned with gloden ear-rings. The (sacri-
fice-) bearing (priests) have proceeded to pour forth in abun~, 

dance the sweet liquor into the large vessel, at the ceremony' 
of taking leave of the personified oblation. Bowing re-
verently, sprinkle the personified oblation,* with the circle 

on its forehead, and its door below, and which is all-diffusive 
and imperishable. 

17. Let us, through thy friendship, live void of fear an a. 
free from pain, and let us see the mighty foe-destroying 
work of thine exhibited as it was to Turv~s•a and Yada. 0 
rainer of felicity, thou overshadowest all the sacrifice.. 

• Thill is barley-meal, ~le,, madP. up in ·the form of II man'1' head, 
which is marked and wouhipped a~ described in the I exl, 




ADIJYA1\'A. XVI, 

performing division of fbe worl~; · and n<> hewer dnwn of 
warriors can injure thee.* The pleasant milk~7ielding (moon-
pl-ets}, rivalling the honey.bee, are being llfirinkled with 
111ater; come quickly, make haste, and drink their juice. 

l' i.!• Let these songs of mine, (0 lndra,) po99e9sor of 
lbUcli wealth, magnify thee ; while our pure, learned priests, 
glorious as the brilliant flame, celebrate thee in hymns of 
praise. He, ha\ling his might increased by the eongs, of a 
thousand Rishis, swells out like the sea, and the same ever. 
propitious divinity has his might and strength celebrated 
during the sacrifice by the glorious Brahmanical psalmody. 

tg. This treasure-guarding sacrifice of thine redounds 
to the benefit of all, both of lord and slave ; and the sacrificial 
thing which is brought forth for thee existed before (as a 
mental conceptioni in the all-controlling lord (Brahm,), the 
father of Saraswatf. The nimble Br~hm~ worship the 
nnerable Indra, to whom sweet liquids are offered, and to 
whom the melted butter is poured forth ; therefore let 
materials for sacrifice be given us in abuadance ; both 
atrength from drinking the moon-plant liquor, and more 
moon-plants to press. 

ao. 0 all-prospering moon-plant, when pressed, bring 
to ua wealth accOlllpanied with cows and horses; and let me 
obtain ·the white-coloured sweet juice, mingled with the 
produce of the cow. Do thou, 0 lord of all gold-coloured 
tlimgs, most brilliant Soma, when pre-pared by men, come 
for our glory, as a ftiend for friendship. Establish with ut 
thy ancient friendship, banish from us every godless con-
t11111ing (Rakshas). All-subduing Soma, destroy our op,po• 
out&; root out the double-faced wretches. 

a1. The Brfhma.J)s adorn and adorn again, and adorn 
aU arouod, a.nd pacify the possessor of might, and make .him 
all-glorious with their sweet liquors, and those who purify 

• Or, he is never '-"gry wilh him.who oftars o~ 




1tim with their gold-ringed fingers, who moves in t~ ,watery 
regfons aloft, and then drips down, and who amid t~ wa,t~t• 
is the surveyor of all things. Sing to the intelliient purifJi~~ 
god, 'Who rains down nourishment like a mighty shower, an4 
who as a serpent casts its old skin, and who, capering like a 
horse, moves forward as the gold-coloured rainer of {elicit~. 
He who takes the lead, who shines in the waters, who is 

produced during the day, who is placed amid ftuids, the gold~ 
'coloured god, bathed with pure water, the lovely-looking 

fluid, whose chariot is formed of rays of light, the possessor 
of all wealth, who has been domiciled by ns, is now being 
purified. · 

[End of the Sixteenth Adhyaya.] 

SEVENTEENTH ADHYA1 YA. 

r. 0 Agni, son of strength, with all thy attendant fires 
accept of this our sacrifice and our song of praise, and give, 
us food; for although we worship each uf the other gods, it 
is into thee (that our offerings) are cast. O lord of all, the 
joyful, tlw celt:brated divinity, exhibit thy love to us, that 
we, tht friendi, of Agni, may love thee. 

2. 0 my friends, we worship your lndra for the be-
nefit of all people. M<Ly he 111,u1ifest himself only to u&, 

0 giver qt all gifts, sender of rain, unlock the treasury of thie 
(ovt'rhangingi cloud, and spe,ik for us, since to thee no one 
dare reply. The rainer of felicity, likt: a venerablt: (bvll 
approaching) the herd, approaches the tribes of men as their 
lord, and to whum no one dare reply. 

3. Do thou, who take,t up with us thy abode, and art 

worthy to be reverently approached, do thou send us wealth, 

with preservation ; since, 0 Agni, thou art the conveyer of 
wealth into this world. Do thou also confer distinction ·on 

.our sons. 0 Agni, do thou save our sons and grandsons 

~ith thy preserving, indestructible, united taids). Remove 




AOHVA'VA XV.II, 

far from us the. wrath of the gods, and the .murderous violence 
of men, ' 

4;• What, 0 Vish~u1 is that most sacred name of thine 
which thou utterest when thou sayest "I am all-glorious ?11 

Do. not conceal thy radiant form from us, and be with us in 
thy other I guileful) form in the field of battle. 0 all-gloriouq 
lord, who art acquainted with all the subjects of knowledge, 
I- now praise that name of thine. Mighty also (in thy cause), 
I celebrate thee who dwellest far distant from this terrestrial 
world. When, 0 Vish1~u, I utter the word Vashat for thee, 
then do thou, as the all-glorious one, honour my oblation 
with acceptance. Let my well-sung hymns of praise extol 
thee, ~nd <lo you* always preserve me with all kinds of 
preservatioR. 

5. 0 Vayu, I, rendered glorious by the performance of 
sacred rites, and desirous of heaven, come to thee the fir.tt 
with the sweet moon-plant juice. 0 god, worthy of all regard, 
come to our moon-plant banquet, drawn by thy million of 
horses. 0 Indra and Vayu, ye are worthy to drink of that 
expressed moon-plant juice; for the streams of liquid flow 
together naturally unto you as waters into a pit. 0 Vayu 
and lndra, mighty, and the lords of might, <lo ye come to the 
moon-plant banquet for our protection in your chariot drawn 
by a million of horses. 

6. On the recession of night, (Soma,) prepared anew, 
advances for the production of nourishment, when the exPr-
tions of the preparers of the sacrifice set him in motion towards 
(the receiving-vessel}, We bring forth pure that essence, of 
his, the liquor drunk so ahundantly hy lndra, which the 
moving singers of sacred song, both formerly and at the 

• The !)l'i"inal here cl,anges f, om the smgular to the plural, according 
i11 tl,is witb the, modern Indian l•ngua,es. 

+.. The wind or •ir, naturally by tvaporat1011, carries olf tbe first lhart 
al .ihe liquid, . 




p;esi!:llt time, 4uaff with their mouths.* tlfe prie~ p~s~ 
the purlAer in. their primeval hymns, while1 Jy bendiiilf:lhe 
supporting fingers are strengthened to taise up (th~ ob1M.fo1tt· 
fo'r the gods. · ., ,:"•:', 

7. I prepare to propitiate1 with hymns of adoratlort, ll~i; 
lord paramount over sacrifices, and like a long-tailed horse;f 

May he who. Is the lord of strength, the great ttaveller, and 
possessed4of beautiful features, be to us without fail · the 
l:ainet of felicity. May he who goes everywhere save us ati 
all times from sinful men1 both far off and at hand. 

8. 0 slayer of foes, thou subduest In the wars all <iut' 
opponents i thou art the destfoyer of the power of the Oaitya. 
and producet (of that of the gods) i thou art the destroyer of 
all our foes, and the annihilator of those who rise against us. 
0 lndra, heaven and earth take refuge in thy strength as a. 
child does in its mother ; and when thou slayest thy all. 
encircling foe, every one of thy opponents becomes enf~bled 
at the contemplation of wrath. 

9. The sacrifice makes Indra grow great, so that he 
manifests himself on the earth1 making the clouds come over 

the heavens. f:xhilarated by the moon-plant beverage, lndra 

enlarges the shining firmament and strikes through the 
mighty cloud. He brought back thdr co,~s to the sons Uf 
Ail.glras, bringing them to light when they were concealed ltt 
the cave1 and laid low Bala (the prince of the Pat.ti). 

10. Do ye extol lndra, who is the subduer of hostll, and 

evet encircled with songs of praise, and bring. hint . here , for 
our protection ; him who subdues in war, but cannot be 
subdued or slain, the drinker of the moon-plant beverage;• 

the bearet away of the sacrifice, whose prowess cannot be 
resisted. 0 1ndra1 throne of praise, and all-wise, give us 
riches in abundance; save us by the wealth of our faet:, 

• O,, the divme co,vs eat tfie sulks with their mouths, 
. f i.,,1 sweepest away thy foes' as sliCh a harH lhl Illes I ihn,A,,,1 
• v4rna111am' is r111d1r1d a war0 ll11rst, 

:13 




·11, Thy internal vigour* is. great, thy :t,towess is all• 
'~owerful, and ~thy intellect sharpens thy illustrious Vajra. 
·Heaven, 0 lniira, extols thy heroism, the earth publishes thy 
fame; thee the waters and mountains' serve as their,lord. 'fhe 
migj:ity, all-preserving Vish1;u1, and Mitra, and Varu;a praise 
thee; thee also the powerful bands of M,aruts delight. 

H. 0 brilliant Agni, men utter the language of adoration 
fo.' obtain strength. Destroy. our foes by these Jthy aids). 
0 'Agni, bring for us, desirous of cows, large stores of wealth ; 
·a,nd do thou, the cause of abundance, abundantly supply us. 
·Do not cast us off in this war, as one casts off a burden, 
but bring into our possession the wealtl1 that covers our 
·enemies. 

13. Ail the moving tribes of men bow down before the 
'wrath ·of Indra, as all the rivers bend towards the sea. He 
'strike-s off the head of the earth-shaking Vritra with his 
rain-causing, hundred-spiked Vajra.t His might has been 
gloriously displayed, and lndra rolls up and spreads out both 
.heaven and earth, as men do a skin-carpet. 

1-4. Let thy intelligent, riches-conveying, pleasing, easy-

· going horses come to us. Do thou, of pleaging form, and 
· causer or ra;n, approach thy splendid, chariot-drawing horses) 
Hhat·-convey to us) the object of our adoration. Receive 

''ole~siilgs on your heads; for (lndra1, who points to happiness 
'with all his tell fingers, stands amid the sacrificial waters. 

[End'of the Seventeenth Adhydja.] 

•,·!'he' t\Jln'the,Bhrishfo ~ives to the word 'indriya' is coarse: I have 
• eicpi'ehta ''ille "ense. 

·'t Any one who h., wi1ne~sed, from the top of some one of the lofty 
Indian mountains, a thunder-storm at a dlstance,:...the,thick blacll cloud 
covering the ph1ins, the forked lightning darting from an electric clouds 
hiJher up in the heavens, and the torrents d rain that afterwards de• 
scen~ed wi/h the dissolutions of the black clouds,-will be able lo appre• 
,iatuhc poctr~ ol l.11Jra's b-Ult with Vrit1a111r, ' 




ADtlV-A\fA xvm; 179 ' 

ElCHTEENTH ADHVA'YA, 

r.' Get ready in haste the moon-plant beverage, ~Jt;, · 
of all praise, for the valiant hero (lndra), for bis exhill\ra.tiQ!l,, 
Let the two powerfuol horses, who partake of the . sac:rintj~.t 
food, bring fndra to us, who acts like a friend, and is wor-; 
shipped by sacred song. Let the quaffer of the moon-plant, 
juice, the slayer of Vfitra, come; and when he comes, let him. 
never depart, but let him with his hundred auxiliaries restrain 
our foes. 

Z, Let the moon-plants enter thee, 0 lndra, as the river• 
do the sea ; for there is no one thing that surpassess thee. 0 
rainer of felicity, all-wakeful lndra, thou in thy might didst 

manifest thyself to partake of the Soma juice, which diffuses, 

itself through all thy abdomen. 0 slayer of Vritra, let th~, 
moon-plant juice be diffused abundantly throughout thy abdo-
men, and let the floods of shining liquor be diffused through 

the glorious bodies ( of the gods). 

3. 0 Agni, who art addressed in songs of praise, enter 
the sacred (place), for the benefit of ev.ery sacrificer, ,to pros-
per the sacred rites ; for there the hymn is sung to Rudra,* 

which procures his presence. May he, the mighty one, the 

unmeasured, known by his smoky ensign, all-joyous, satisfy 

us in respect of solemn rites and supplies of; food. May that 

Agni, who is lord of all, the divine, who acts to us as a signa1. 

and is possessed of great radiance, hear us when engaged in 
our sacred songs. 

4. Do ye sing, while the sacrifice is going on to the much. 
invoked destroyer of foes, the song which delights the power-

ful god, as (grass does) the c<!w· The every-where-diffused 
Indra does not withhold th~ gift of food joined to cows, when 

he hears our songs of praise ; for it was he, the slayer of foes, 
. ' 

• Rudra is hPre a name of Agni. There is no notice of S'iva \in thi1 
v,c1a, unless he be through Rudra identified with A11ni, 




that entered the crowded ~ow.house of the host.destroying 
P&l)i., and by his mighty aids brought the cows to light, 

5. This Vi&hl,lu, when he made his tour of the world, 
put down his foot but three times, and coverd all (the, e~rt h) 
with- the dusty (sole of his foot). Vishl}.u the pteMrVtr, 
the indefatigable, made the journey in three steps, and thus 
upheld the performance of sacred rites. Regard- well the 
work, of Vish1,1u ; for on their account are you allowed to 
put,your hand to sacred rites. He is the intimate companion 
and friend of Indra. The glorious sages look to the steps 
of V18hl)u, as to the radiance spread through the heavens. 
The Brahmal,)s, singers of eucharistic hymns, and ever-wake-
ful, glorify that supreme footstep of Vishl}.u. Since Vish1;1u 
has made that journey over the seven regions of the e~rth, let 
the gods preserve us.* 

6. Let not thy priests engage in their delightful services 
at a distance from us; and shouldst thou be at a d:istaoce, 
come to our joyous assembly, and, remaining in our presenee, 
listen to our (songs of praise). These, the singers of thy 
sacred hymns, sit amid the vessels of moon-plant juice, as a 
fly does in a pot of honey ; and the singers, desirous ol 
wealth, rest for the object of their desire with confidence oil 
lndra, as a man puts his foot on a chariot. 

7. It is he that receives praise, therefore do ye chant the 
ancient solemn word of Brahma, and sing the pristine long 
psalter adapted to the sacrifice, and procure intellectual 
endowments for our singer. • Let Indra rain down on us abun-
dance of wealth ; let him give us land, and make us glorious 
as. the Sun, since our white, pure libations of moon-plant juice, 
mingled with the produce of t_he cow, delight lndra. 

a. 0 Soma, thou art poured out for lndra, the slayer 
of Vritra, for his drinking ; for he is the giver of gifts, and 
the god who, like a heron, sits. in ihe assembly of men. 

• This par~graph refers to the Vimana -Av.iar. 




ADHYA'YA XVllf, . 
DQ ye, 0 my learned friends, along with us, both partake of, 
and worship the all•brilliant, powerful, food inhabiting (So~). 
[PatJityam hari1a,,tam-as before.l , 

g. [Kasfamindra-as before.] 0 po9Sessor of ri~h•~·. 
prosper in tht>lle wars those who bestow on thee cleligl\t. 
inspiring, sacrificial viands. 0 possessor of the horses H!!,rl, 
through the songs with which we adore thee, may we witb· 
'Our sons escape from all our difficulties. 0 ye priests, do ye-
sprinkle (for Indra) the sweet juice of the sweet, nourishirlf 
(plant) ; for that heroic god, who always grows great OJ) 
sacrifices, is the object of our praises. 

10. 0 lndra, who ridest on the horses Harf, there is· o<> 
one who now is able to do justice to thy praise, as it was. 
celebrated of old, through deficiency in might and reverence. 
We, desirous of food, call upon your Indra, lord of provision9t 
who grows great by our sacrifices, performed by men no~ 
inattentive to their duties. 

11. Do ye celebrate him, who carries the (sacrifice}~ 
heaven ; for the terrestrial gods approach their divine lord,, 
and thou, Agni, forwardest the sacrifice into the midst of the 
gods. Do thou, our chanter, praise Agni, the all-liberal giver 
of wealth, who is manifested with varied radiance, and who 
is the primeval god, the receiver of this moon-plant oblation,.. 

th&t the sacrifice may be prosperous when all the rites are· 
performed. 

12. ' 0 Soma, when pressed by the stones, thou movest 
across the goat's-hair strainer, which thy green juice, ,pro~ 
ceeding from the boards, enters, and afterwards takest up- thy 
abode in the waters, as a mart does in a city. Soma, desirous-
of affording nourishment. is purified by moving across the· 

sheep's-hair strainer, and appears like a high-spirited horse_,. 
rejoicing, and purified by the learned priests an•d sacrecf 
hymns: 

13. We give the liquor to the holder of the thunderbolt 

to drink. Do thou bring t~e expressed juice for the oblation,,. 




'· 1,, ADHYA1YA xvnr. 
a.nd let him come to honour ,US. with his preserrce, whne-
listening to the sacred hymns .. Himself a- thief, he- keeps off 
thie·ves, and, 'though a slayer of traveflers, is reTerentially 
w~rahipped in the highways. Honour, 0 lndra, with ac~ept-
aqce this (liquor) of ours, and this song, and come with air 
varied mental endowments. 
,.: 

14. 0 lndra and Agni, illuminators of heaven, ye two 
appear glorious in the wars ; your might is there peculiarly 
conspicuous. [lndrngni-see !Jefore; Jnrlr•ya-6efore; 
Ka-6efore.*J 
· 15. As an elephant in search (of a foe) drops a fragrant 
juice from his temples, so does (Indra) distil a liquid juice, 
the product of many libations. No one, 0 mighty god, can 
restrain thee ; and when thou hast drunk the expressed moon-
plant juice, thou movest everywhere by thy might ; Indra, 
the mighty one, never to be overcome, always stable, arrayed 
in armour !for the war, and the possessor of riches, and who,. 
when he hears the invocation of the chanter, never re€edes, 
from us, but comes into his presence. 

16. The clean, brilliant, purified vessels of moon-plant 
juice are being prepared while all the holy hymns are being 
recited. The purifying juice descends from heaven and from 
"the mid-air, a11d is prepared on the earth, upon the elevated-
strainer. The all-diffusive, white, brilliant (streams of juice), 
which destroys all that hate us, are now being prepared. 

17. I call on lndra and Agni, the beaters down of our 
foes; and destroyers of our enemies, the all-victorious and 
invincible, the ~bestowers of foop. [Tke next two lines were 
given before.] 

11. We, who are employed in providing sacrificial food, 
.prepared in thy presence, 0 Agni, produced by might 10£ 
man), a pleasing, divine, introduction-procuring song. 0 

• These Texts havin11 occurred before, in the MSS. only the be1in• 
ning i■ 11iven1 and the Bhti.1h1a does not agairl explain 'them, 




• 
ABIIVA'VA ,u,t 

Agn,i, who$e appearance is that of burnished gold, we lip•,' 
proach the place of thy shining presence as (a travelle~ ~s) 
the shade. He, the slayer of our foes, is lik«; a fierce warrior, . 
or like a sharp-horned, quick-advancing bull. 0 Agni, it was 
thou that ·didst b1:1rn down the citie3,* · 

, 19. We desire the presence of the faithful friend of all 
·men, the p·reserv~r of the flame of the sacrifice, the indes. 

11:ructible, brilliant god. He who through sacrificial rites sates 
the world fro;rt all [evils, became visible, and, bringing the 
world to acquiesce in our desires, created the different. 

seasofts. Agni, the desire of·,all that has received, and all 
that will receive existence, ~hines forth as supreme lord in all · 
the worlds of delight. 

[End of tke E;gkteentk Adkyaya.] 

NINETEENTH AOl-tYA1YA, 
• 

r, Agni, the performer of wondrous works, adorns his 
own person with the ancient hymn that is now to be produced, 
and grows great through the means of learned Brahmaq.s, 

l call upon Agni, the descendant of food, possessed of pure 
radiance, to be present in this indestructible sacrifice. 0 
Agni, who with thy radiant flame art worthy of all honour 
from thy friends, sit down on the sacred grass. 

2. 0 Soma, bruised by stones, thy· might, which cleavr:s 
through the Rakshasas, here takes its station. Disperae all' 
who light against us. Thou, by· thy might, art the destroyer 

of foes, so that I praise thee, and place the enemies' wealth 
in my chariot. Th~ oolemnities of thee, the purifier, cannot 

• 'l'ripura,ura had three cities; one of iron, one of silver, and one of 
gold. l'hese, according 10 the commoh legend, were burnt down b;)' 

S'iva, The Commentator therefore adds, 1h11 the S'iva who burnt the 
cities was Rpdra, and he; accordinir to the Vedas, is A11ni; ;or elte A11ri; 
is 1aid,o have caused the conflagration, from S'iva having 111ed a )>urn• 
ing 11rrow, See third paragra,ph of thi'I Adhyaya, 




ADHVA1VA x,x. 

lbe broken in upon by the e;:il~minded R!k~hasas. Oo th11u 
·break to pieces those that light against thee. fhe priest 
-sends forwaTd into the sacred waters the joy-distilling, might .. 
~nferring juice. 

3. Come, 0 lndra, with thy peacock.feather.resembling 
1'.orses. Let no caster of snares draw thee away from us, but 
'CO!"e here with the celerity of one passing through the land al 
Dhanwa.* lndra is the devourer o( Vritra, o\lerthrower of 
,&la, destroyer of cities, shedder down of water, he who 
'll'IOUnts his 1::hariot when the tY.o horses Har! neigh, and the 
-carrier by assault of the enemies' strongholds. Thou feedest 
the institutor of the sacrifice, as a cow-herd does his cows, and 
,as the cows lick up the grass ; and as streams flow into the 

. fake, (so do the streams of liquoPinto thee). 
4. As the red stag when thirsty goes to the take, free 

of moss and weed~, so do thou come quickly to us, who 
have obtained thy ffiendship, and drink along with the sons 
of Kai,wa. 0 lndra, possessor of riches, let the moon-plant 
juice delight thee, that thou mayest give wealth to the 
b1stitutor of the moon-plant sacrifice. It was when thou 
didst covertly drink the Soma juice, poured into the ladle1 
that thou didst become possess!'d of thy primeval might. 

5. 0 · thou possessed of great might, thou, as an all, 
glorious di,inity, art the object of human praise. 0 possessor 
of riches, thou art the bestower of happiness, therelore 1 
address thee in hymns of praiqe; let not thy rkhes ever come 
to an end, 0 god, who assignest to us a place of abode, 
let not thy auxiliary ( Maruts ever fail) us. 0 aider of men, 
to us the far-seein~ sages measurl' out all kinds of wealth. 

6. She, the kind bringt:r to light of beinl{9, the mother 
(of active labours), the destroyer (of darkness), the daughter 
ef heaven, (the Morn,) succe~ding to her sister (Night), 

• Said In the Blihhya to b1 M:£rw6r. h c:ontain1 but little wateri 
hence 1h1 11eed of capcd11ion, 




-shines lorth. Swift as a hotse, the mother of the rays of 
light, the friend of sacrifices, the friend of the As'wini 
Kumaras, is the goddess Aurora. Truly thou art the friend 
of the As'wini Kumaras, the mother of the rays of liglit, and 
hast dominion over wealth. , · 

7. This newly .manifested, beloved morn, the destroyer 
of darkness, (descends) from heaven. 0 sons of As'wini, 
I praise your might ; even you, who are worthy of being 
reverently approached, whose mother is the sea, you, .who 
by your intelligence gain riches, and who, through sacred 
rites, give us a fixed place of abode. While your chariot is 
moving along in the much-extolled firmament, our praises 
receive expression. 

8. 0 Aurora, partaker of sacrificial food, bring us collect• 
ed stores of wealth, by which we may obtain sons and grand-
sons. 0 possessor of cows and horses, diffuser of radiance, 
famed for thy gracious, faithful words, do thou, to-day, in 
this place, keep darkness at a distance from our wealth-
procuring rites. 0 partaker of sacrificial food, yoke to-day 
thy glowing horses, and bring to us all happiness-conferring 

things. 
9. 0 all-enveloping sons of As'wini, destroyers of foes, 

of subd11ed minds, give us valuable, pleasttre-conferring 
wealth, so that we may obtain a livelihood : get now on your 
<:hi1,riot, (aull come) into our presence. 0 gods, dispellers of 
disease, destroyers of foes, possessed of the golden chariot, 
let your horses, which are ready in the morning, bring you 
here to the drinking of the moon-plant beverage. Ye, after 
the instituted mode, produced the much-praised light in the 
heavens for the benefit of man ; let the sons of As'wini bring 
for us strengthening food. 

10. I praise Agni, the all-protecting home, to which the 
-cows betake themselves for refuge, to which the fleet horses 
betake themselves, as well as the offerers of the ,daily sacri-
fices. 0 god, bri111g food for those who celebrate thy praise. 

24 




r86 ADH\'A'VA Xll{. 

The all-seeing Agni gives to the man (who worships him) a 
powerful (offspring). Agni, when ~ropitiated, makes the 
riches flow in on us, which are produced in many places, and 
are productive of fame, and which may serve for gifts, 0 
god, bring food, etc. 0 praise that Agni whom the cows 
approach, and the swift-going horses, and the noble-born 
sages. 0 god, bring, etc. 

1 r. 0 brilliant Aurora, enlighten our minds as 'thou hast 
enlightened us in times past, that this day we may obtain 
much wealth. 0 thou of glorious origin. by whose aid we 
obtain horst's, (favour mr) Satv~s'ravas, son of Vayya. O 
recipient of pr;,i,r, bringer of brilliant treasures, destroyer of 
darkness, daughter of heaven, powerful goddess, give us a 
place of abode, 0 thou, etc. May she to-day, who is the 
bringer of riches, the daughter of the Sun, the dispeller of 
darkness, the mighty goddess, to-day find us a place of abode, 
0 thou, etc. 

12. 0 sons of As'wini, the chanting Rishis adorn with 
hymns of praise thy most beloved. felicity-raining, wealth-
COl)Veying chariot. 0 ye skilled in all pleasure-conferring 
knowledge, do ye hear my invocation. 0 sons of As'wini, 
passing others, come to us, that I may always gain the advan. 
tage over all my foes. 0 piercers of the hearts of your foes1 
who ride in a golden chariot, hestowers of brilliant treasures, 
propellers of rivers, skilled in pleasure-conferring knowledge, 
hear my invocation. 0 ~ons of !\s'wini, come ye ·to us, 
bearing jewels, wearing the appearance of Rudras, having a: 
golden rhariot, possessors of the wealth of provisions, who are 
the objects of our worship, skilled·, etc. 

13. A;ni is adm,mished by the fuel of the sacrificers, 
when the morning comes, in the same manner as is the cow; 
and the flames, bursting upwards, advance towards their 
(heavenly) seat, with the noise of mighty bulls amid the bran• 
ches (of the trees of the forest). This sacrifice-forwarding 
Agni, when 'admonished to offer.sacrifices to the gods, with 




ADIIYA'VA XJX 

kindly disposition rises aloft, and the might of the blazing, 
shining divinity, and the mighty god himself, delivers the· 
world from darkness. When he looses the,(dark) fetters of 
the (world's) trihes, the radiant Agni shines forth with brilliant 
rays. Afterwards, the prospering streams, flowing from 
the elevated strainer, come in contact with the vessel, and, 
desiring to furnish nourishment, are drunk by Agni from the 
ladles. 

14. This most excellent of lights comes, the all-glorious 
and all-revealing comes into being, diffusing himself abroad : 
and as Night i~ the daughter of the Sun, ~o does she direct 
her mind to the womb (of the Morn), for the production of 
the Dawn. The brilliant shining (Morn), foster-child of 
the radiant Sun, comes forth, and the dark (Night) fixes her 
mind on her neighbou, '. abo(le. They arc a nearly related pair, 
immortal, mutually succee<ling each c,ther, and destroying one 
another in their passage through f'arth. The infinite paths of 
the sisters is one: instructed by the god (of day), it is tra-
versed by them alternately. The creative Night and Morn 
are of one mind, but diverse in form, and neither encroach on 
each other, nor ever stand ,till. 

15. Agni before the ddwn sh111es forth; for the voices of 
the Brahmat;ts, lovers of tht: gods, have raised themselves. 0 
sons of As'wmi, who go before our foes, who ride in chariots, 
do ye come to the splcn<l1d (sacrifice), complete in all its p~rts. 
0 sons of As'wini, when you, first-rate travellers, m",t eJgerly 
come in at the end of the well-prepared (sacrifice), do· not 
reject it; for ye are here at present the objects of our praise. 
When the day commences do ye most eagerly come with your 
life-preserving (viands) to the viandless sacrifice, bringing 
happiness to the master of the ceremonies. 0 come ye at 
the milking of the cows, at the dawn of day, at mid-day, and 
when the sun declines, ,1igbt and day, with your felicitous 
preservation. Even now, 0 sons of As'wini, the banquet 
cannot proceed without you. 




ADHYAtYA XtX'. 

16. These intelligeSM:e-giving rays of morn spread tight 
€>Ver the eastern, zrial region ; and the moving, creative, 
generative, morning rays, march Eorth like strong men arrayed 
in armour. The resplendent rays proceed forward with free-
dom, and, self-yoked, the glowing beams wiite themselves 
(to the chariot). All intelligences awake with the morning, 
and the before-mentioned rays of the brilliant (goddess) pay 
their respects to the radiant Sun. The sacrifice-receiving 
Aurora is worshipped by one effort, even frnm afar,* and 
brings food without fail to the pious bountiful master of the 
moon-plant banquet. 

17. The terrestrial fire is lightenect up, the radiant Sun 
rises. The magnificent joyful Aurora t'ncompa.sses all things 
with her radiance. Therefore let the sons of As'wini yoke 
their chariot to go to the banquet, and tet the generative Sun 
bring into action all the various operations of the world. 
0 sons of As'wini, when you yoke your rain-conveying chariot, 
distil to us strength along with the sweet water. Send us 
the food which is in (the enemies') camp, and grant that we 
may obtain wealth in the conflict of heroes. 0 sons of 
As'wini, let your three-wheeled, easy-goiBg, swift-horsed, 
much-praised, triple-poled,t riches-bearing,. all-resplendent 
thariot bring happiness into our presence, for the sake both 
of our bipeds and quadrupeds. 

18. Let thy separated drops bring into our presence 
food in quantity manifold, like the drops of rain that fall from 
heaven. The gold-coloured divinity, who overlooks all the 
delight-inspiring hymns, distils the vapour that drives away 
the Rakshasas. The producer of virtuous actions, when 
purified by mortals, like a fearless king, sits after the manner 
of a hawk over the· sacred waters. Thou, 0 Soma, when 

• i.e., without the necessity of turning round, 

t i.,., a pole composeJ 11f three pieces of wood, as is usaal to this 
day in India, 




ADHYA'YA XX, 189 

purified by dwelling in heaven, art manifested on earth. Do 

thou bring us all we wish. 

[End of the Nineteenth Adhy,fya.] 

TWENTIETH ADHYA'YA. 

I. The streams of the distilling, expressed divinity. 

pleasing juice pour out might to us. The creative singers and 

performers of sacred rites purify the swift-moving, shining, 

increasing, extolled (moon-plant juice). 0 possessor of 

much wealth, fill up,the extolled receiving-vessel with these 

gl-0rious emanations from thy purified self. 

2. I praise that Indra who is famed among the gods, 

who.is the increaser of all, and manifested in every season. 

0 lord of might, our no common songs seek access to thee. 

[ Vis' ruta-ree before.] 
3. [A'tvaratham-as b~fore.J O possessor of great 

might, performer of meritorious acts, worthy of divine wor-

ship, thou manifestest thyseH with thy all-pervading might. 

With the might of thy mighty self, let thy two hands grasp 

the golden, earth-enveloping thunderbolt. 

4. He who knows all ancient things, and when he comes 
to the ground where is the sacrificial assembly, blazes forth 

like a refreshing breeze, springing up in the heavens, and 

existing in his hundred forms, gives forth a radiance like that 

of the Sun. He who has a double birth, who flames forth 

from three places, enlightening all moving beings, who is the 

inviter of the gods, the principal offerer of oblations, takes 

his seat 011 the abode of the waters.* He who gives to him 
who is the inviter of the gods, has a double birth, and holds 

all valuable things for the purpose of giving them in exchange 

for sacrificial food, will obtain a virtuous son. 

• The double birth is f, om two pieces of wood ; or, by friction united 
with consecration ; DY, from heaven.and earth, Th■ 1hree places are the 
three sacred fire• plaQlt, 




190 ADIIVA1YA XX. 

5 .. 0 Agni, to day we extol thee with floods of songs, 
who (bearest away our sacrifices) like a horse, art to us a 
kind benefact6r, and desired by us with all our hearts. In 
very truth, 0 rite-prospering Agni, thou hast become the 
conveyer of this prosperous, propitious, desire-fulfilling, 
properly-conducted mingled oblation. 0 Agni, shining as 
the Sun, propitious, and surrounrled with all thy radiance, 
come into our presence with all those heavenly essences. 

6. 0 immortal Agni, who knowest the place of all 
beings, bring to us from the regions of the morning, for the 
matter of the sacrifice, wealth which procures an excellent 
place of abode, and convey to us the gods that love to come 
in the morning. Thou, 0 Agni, art the object of our Ates, 
the herald of the gods, the conveyer of the offering, the 
chariot to bring the gods to the sacrifice, along with the 
As'wini Kumaras and the goddess Aurora. Grant us bodily 
vigour and abundance of food, . 

7. The weakling reduces to nothing the warrior and the 
destroyer in battle of many cities, even although in the prime 
of life. Behold the ;ingenuity and might of this god; to-day 
he dies, to-morrow he revives. He is mighty through his 
might, red in his appearance, possessed of beauteous wings; 
he is powerful, eternal, and without a fixed abode, He un-
failingly accomplishes all that he conceives, lets nothing prove 
vain, but obtains by conquest, which he freely bestows. In 
union with the Maruts, the holder of the thunderbolt, the 
slaughterer of Vritra, sends down showers. These gods set 
themselves to the work of producing water in the mighty 
firmament, by the, mighty means required for the beloved 

art. 

8. This moon-plant juice has been expressed; therefore 
let the Maruts, who shine with unborrowed radiance, and the 
sons of As'wini, drink of it. Mjtra, and Aryama, and VarUJ;ia 
also drink of the newly-produced juice, purified by the strain-




AOI-IVA'VA ){)(, 191 

er, and occupying three places.* lndra, in an especial man• 
ner, expresses his delight like a chanter, honouring with &e• 

ceptance, early in the mot'ning, this expressed juice mixed 
with the produce of the cow. 

9. Truly, 0 Surya, thou art mighty. Truly, 0 A'ditya,f 
thou art mighty; and the mi.;ht of thee, the mighty (god), is 
above all praise. 0 glorious divinity, thou art mighty through 

thy inherent might. Truly thou art mighty, 0 Surya, through 

thy fame. Thou art, indeed, mighty, 0 brilliant god. Thou, 

by thy might, art the destroyer of Asurs, and the instructor 

of the gods, whose radiance is all-expansive and indestruc-

tible. 

10. 0 lord of inebriating liquors, come into our presence 

with thy two horses Bari, to the banquet of expressed juice; 

come into nur presence with thy horses Harf. 0 lndra, slayer 

of Vritra, a11d performt>r of meritorious acts, well acquainted 

with these two differing modes of action, come, etc. Thou 

art viewed as the sl;, yer of V ritra, and thou art the drinker of 
thf-' moon-plant liquor. Come, etc. I 

I I. Do ye, for the obtaining of much wealth, bring the 
oblation forwa1d for.the mighty (ln<lra), and raise a joyful 

song of praise to obtain greater intelligence. 0 (Indra), 

satisfier of men, run to the mt>n who satisfy thee (with 

oblations). 0 ye Brahmar.ts, do ye prepare a well-sung hymn 

of praise and sacrificial viands to the mighty Indra, who 

occupies an immeasurably extendrd space. The gods, 
possessors of intelligence, will never injure his rites. 

12. The voices of the singers rise around (lndra}, whose 
rage no one can withstand, who is lord of all, in order that 

he may subdue our foes. Do ye extol our brother possessor of 
the two horses Had. I am lord of whatever Indra possesses; 

therefore O giver of wealth, I can support the chanter of 

the praiies of the gods, nor will I ever consign him to poverty. 

• i.e., the strainer, rece1v1111:-vessel, and oblat1on•r~ce1ving flre•place. 
t This and Surya are name, of the Sun, 




,~a ADHVA'VA lOt 

(When Indra says) "I bestow wealth on him who day by day 
performs my worship, where·,er he may be," (the BrAhmai;,. 
replies) " 0 possew,r of riches, there is no one else who bes-
tows gifts like thee, none worthy of equal praise, no one else 
who cherishes us as a father." 

13. Hear the call of the brusing-stone of me, the quaffer 
of the moon-plant beverage; attend to the song of the wor-
shipping Brahma!)., and make these present services of mine 
productive of prosperity. Knowing the power of him who 
slew the Asurs, I never abandon the celebr<1tion of the praise 
of him who slew them, nor cease to proclaim his renown. On 
the contrary, 0 thou possessor of self-acquired celebrity, I 
ever publish thy fame. 0 possessor of riches, thy moon-
plant banquets are many among men, and many are the 
hymns of praise that are sung to thee; therefore do not linger 
in coming, or ever remove to a great distance from us. 

14. Praise ye the might of that lndra who sits in the 
front of the chariot, who makes us stand firm in battle, 
~en in the close conflict, who is the slayer of clouds of 
foes* and the sender (of riches): let him attend to our 
(solemn songs\ and cause that the relaxed strings of our 
enemies' bows be broken in pieces. Thou cre_atest th.e down-
flowing flood, thou strikest through the all-enveloping cloud.* 
Thou art without a foe, the preserver of every valuable thing. 
We embrace thee ; therefote do thou cause, &c. Let all the 
faMeeing minds of our foes suffer destruction ; and, 0 Indra, 
cast thy slaughtering weapon amid the enemies who wish to 
slay us, and be to us a bestowcr of wealth by conferring (on 
us their spoil) ; and do thou cause, etc. 

r 5. Let the praises of a rich, wealthy, famous god like 
thee, who art served by the horses Had, be especially blessed 
with wealth; and let the hater of those who apply not them• 
selves to sacred music accept our well-chanted psalter and 

"' This phrase is also a translation ol V ritra, 




wel\-aung hyn'ln9 of praise. 0 lndra, oevel: deii~r us over· · 
to the murderous crew, never permit us to be conqutred, but 
by thy acts, 0 mighty god1 teach us (to vanquish). 

16. Come, 0 lndra, to the eucharistic bymns of KBJ1.WII 
with thy horses Had i and whilst thou rulest over the firm&• 
ment, do thou, uniting with the shining offering, go thy way 
to heaven. In this sacrifice (Soma), the axle of these tbruis-
ing-stones), makes (the stalks) to shake as a wolf does a flock 
of sheep. Whilst thou rulest1 etc. Let the moon-plant 
bruising-stone, making a noise, bring thee, (0 Soma,) to us 
by its voice. Whilst thou rulest, etc. 

17. 0 most plea~ant exhilarating Soma, flow out pure 
for lndra. Thy pressed, wisdom-giving white streams send 
forth their sound. The men who are as ready for food, a$ a 
waggon is for its load, prepare (the juice) for the banquet 
of the gods. 

18. I praise Agni, the inviter to the sacrifice, the givel' 
of gifts, the giver of a place of abode, the son of strengtJt, 
the knower of all things, who canies aloft the offering with 
his all collecting power, and embraces the white, flaming, 
brilliant, flowing stream of offered up melted butter. 0 most 
intelligent god, we, the institutors of sacrifices, offer up obla-
tions to him who is most worthy of offerings, the, eldest 
descendant of Angiras, beloved when attended by the wise 
priests, and resplendent when served with sacred hymns1 
going everywhere like the Sun, the inviter of the gods for 
the benefit of man, the white-haired, the tainet of felicity, 
thee our people especially propitiate that thou mayest send 
(them to heaYen). He also, by his shining powerful might 
blazing forth, slays those that hate us, slays our haters, as 
with a battle-axe. By meeting with whom also the firm im• 
penetrable fortress is swept away as if it were but a stream· 
of water ; who, pressing on, subdues his foes, and never 
recc:des, just as brave archers never draw back. 

[Ena' 11/ tAe TweHtielk Adk)'4)',.,] 
25 




I~ ADHYA'YA XXI. 

TWEN'fY-FIRST ADHYA'YA, 

1. 0 Agni, possessor of resplendent tre:i.su es, thy store!! 
of food are renowned, thy radiance is of excee ling brilliance. 
O sage, possessor of glorious rays, it is the u Lhat bestowest 

on the institutors of sacrifice food worthy of being corn• 
memorated. 0 po'lsessor of purifying radiance, of shining 
radiance, and of abiding radiance, do thou come to us with 
thy luminous beams. And as a son comin~ to light from 
thy mother wood, save us and preserve the two worlds. 0 
descendant of food, who bowest all bein~s,* rejoice 
in our hymns of prais,·, and be sati,fiefi with our works. 
The mu1tilnrm, wondt'rously-protPcti11g sacrificial viands are 
being offered up to theP, Thou, t) immortal Agni, encounter. 
ing our earth-horn foes, bestowest on u, abundant wealth; 
and thyself of a foi·m pleasant to approach, thou shinest 
forth anrl fillest uo tn us the reward of our acceptable 
rites, (We pra1;r thl'e), the performer of sacrifice, the 
all-wise, the posst·;,or oi great wealth, the giver of re-
nowned gifts. It is thou, th,~ posse~sor of riches, that 
bestowest stores of provisions and wealth worthy of accept-
anu Mtn having plared thre, the true, the worshipful, the 
reverently-to-be-approache<l Agni, in thy recrss to procure 
happiness, (other) men in pairs (extol) with their voices thee, 
the acute-eared, 11ll-~xpa11dt"d as~ociate of the gods. 

2. 0 Agni, by thy aids (the sacrificer), that is to say, he 
to whom thou afiordest tl1~ benefit of thy friendship, when 
supplierl wnh brave heroes, and food, and sacred rites, over-
comes all. 0 recipient of divine service, the watery, cart. 
conveyed, spring-produced, shining god is offered up to thee. 
Thou, on account of thy power. art beloved by the morn, 
for thou shmest forth from amid the encircling gloom of 
nit;,ht. 

• r,anslation of 'Ja1avedas,' which is e_lsewhere translated 'possessoc 
ol wealth,' and 'possessor of knowledge.' 




ADHYA'YA XXI. 195 

3, The vegetable tribes lay hold on Agni, when lying in 
the womb of the seasons, and the maternal waters bring him 
forth. Ai:ain, in like manner, at all times the trees and 
shrubs gi,e him birth. 

4. Agni pours forth his offering for lndra, and with his 
white radiance shin~s in the firmament, and, like a she. 
buffalo, produces abundance (for the god5). 

5. Him who is the ever-wakeful the sacred hymns de-
light. Him who is the ever-wakeful the holy songs encircle. 
To him who is the ever-wakeful the moon-plant liquor says, 
(Lay hold of me,) for to obtain thy friendship I am stationed 

here. 
6. Agni, who is ever-wakeful, the sacred hymns delight; 

[and so on, as the /,,st.] 
7. We prostrate ourselves before the friendly divinities, 

who have previous to the sacrifice taken their seat; we pros-
trate ourselves before the gods, who are seated altogether. 
I now apply mysf'if to the song which has a hundred measures 
and proceeds in a liundred paths. I apply myself to the song 
which proceeds in a hundred paths. I sing the thousand-
direction-taking Sama, compos,-.d in the Gayatrf, Trishtup, 
and Jagati metres. The S;(ma, composed in the Gayatri, 
Trishtup, and Jagati metre,, tht> singers hold up in alJ its 
parts, and the god•; th.,re take up their abode. 

8. Agni is radiance, and Radiance is Agni; lndra is 
radiance, and Radiance is lndra. The Sun is radiance and 
Radiance is the Sun. 0 Agni, again and again supply us 
with strength, with food, and with long life ; again and again 
save us from our sins. 0 Agni, supply us with wealth, water 
us on all sid~s with free, enjovment-a!Tording streams. 

9. When I, 0 lndra, shall become a possessor of wealth 
like thee, then assuredly my singer of sacred hymns shall 
possess abundance of cows. When, 0 all-powerfol god, I 
shall become a lord of ~ows, then shall I bestow the wealth I 
wish to give to this singer of sacred s()ng-. My pleasant 




' ADll\;A'VA lCXt. 

voice is the nourishing mil«;h-cow which milks out cows and 
horses for the institutor of thii, moon-plant sacrifice. 

10. 0 ye, Waters, be to us promoters of happiness, and 
stand on· our side to procure for us provisions and highly 
felicitous foresight. Let your most prospering juices be 
ministered to us in this world with the readiness that atlec. 
tionate mothers (supply their infants). We cast you on (our 
bodies) with celerity, you who delight us by the destruction 
of our sins.* Ye, Waters, also procure for us an (illustrious) 
progeny. 

11. 0 Wind, let thy soothing delicious medicine enter 
our breasts, and do thou greatly extend our term of life. 
0 Wind, thou art to us even as a father, even as a brother, 
to us even as an intimate friend. Do thou work with us for 
the preservation of the life-preserving sacrifice. U Wind, 
bestow on us, to afford us a living, a portion of that unfailing 
(wealth) which is in thy house carefully stored up. 

12. The fiery divinity, gracefully spreading his wings, 
powerful and multiform, supporting his gold-coloured, flame. 
enveloped, feeding wood, and clothing himself time by time 
with. the solar radiance,t and in his own proper person, 
manifests himself in every sacrifice. The seminal, multiform 
radiance is the sustainer of fluids, the same is the supporter 
of the dry ground ; and spreading his glory through the 
heaven~, he calls for the e~sence of Soma, the rainer of 
felicity. He, surr:iunded with his thousand flames, _worthy 
of a share in the sacrifice, lays hold on the solar radiance. 
He, the giver of thousands, the giver of hundreds, the giver 
of manifold gifts, is the sustainer of heaven and the pro-
tector of the inhabitants of earth. 

• O,, we reverently approach you who make our. habitation corn• 
fottable. 

t 'Che S'l'ltli thus explain5 this allusion. The Sun, at the time of hit 
..uing, enters Agni ; and on this account fire appears brilliant al a muc:h 
1r11wr ~i~n~ duri.111 lh~ ni&ht Lh&n d11ri11& the day. 




ADHVA1VA XXIJ, 197 

13. 0 Garuda, the men whose-, breasts are filled with 
devotional feeling see thee while moving thy wings grace-
fully in the heavens, as tho11 art radiant like gd!d, and the 
messenger of Varu.Q.a, art the bird that producest in the womb 
of Yama the all-controlling (Agni), and art the nourisher of 
men). The water-preserving, aloft-going Garuda takes his 
station before us in the heavens, lays hold of his varieg~ed 
armour, and coming himself with his own glorious plumage, 
like the Sun, to await our reverential view, he gives birth to· 
the adorable, beloved (showers of rain). Covered with 
watery drops in the heavens, and shining with the light 
of the water-collecting (Sun), he goes to the fluid-rec~iving 
(cloud) ; and the Sun, shining with his white radiance, 
produces through the three worlds the delightful (rain).* 

[End of the Twenty-First Adhyaya.] 

TWENTY-SECOND ADHVA'VA, 

1. The fleet Soma, wlio is terrible as a sharp-horned 
bull, who slays his foes and vexes their men, who controls all 
living creatures, and never shuts his eyes, though himself but 
a single hero, subdues by one effort a hundred hosts. 0 
warriors, ye obtain the victory by means of the life-control. 
ling, conquering, warring, immoveable, all-supporting Indra, 
who never shuts his eyes, and subdues your foes by his 
arrow-holding, rain-dispensing hand. This lndra is armed 
with darts in his hands, and with drawn swords : with his 
band he engages in close conflict in the battle, conquers in 
dose conflict, drinks the moon-plant beverage, has powerful 
arms, has his bow drawn, and slays his foes with his arrows. 
shot abroad. 

2. 0 Vrihaspati, surround us with thy chariot, for tho~' 
art the slayer of the Rak~hasas, the destroyer of foes, the 

• G~ruda isd,e well-k11own vehicle of Vishnu, and, properly speak• 
i ng, i1 a deified eagle. 




AOIIYA'y'11 XX11. 

breaker of armies, the slaughterer in war, the causer of 
victory, the preserver of our chariots. 0 lndra, do thou, who 
knowest thll seat of water, hast experience of all might, and 
art possessed of stable heroism and surpassing bravery, all. 
powerful, fleet, the subjugator, the terrible god, who subduest 
heroes, subducst all beings, art the producer of might, stand 
up on thy conquering chariot. 0 my friends, who are the 
companions of my youth, do ye in alternate bands ascribe 
heroism to lndra, and call upon him, who is the clear~r of 
water,-bringing clouds, and who knows where water is, who 
has in his hand the thunderbolt, wtio is victorious in war, and 
~tays his foes by his might. 

3. Let lndra, who pierces the watery cloud by his might, 
the ruthless hero, who is terrible in his wrath, that cannot be 
moved from his place, the subduer of armies, invincible in 
war, preserve our armies in the battle. Let lndra, the leader 
of the gods, and Vrihaspati, and Soma, the prosperer of 
sacrifices, march in front; and let the Maruts also advance at 
the head of the foe-subduing, conquering army of the gods. 
Let the mighty strength of the rain-dispensing lndra, of the 
radiant Varul).a, · and of the Maruts, descended from the 
mother of the gods, (be manifested.) Now the shout of 
victory rises from the mighty, earth-shaking, victorious gods. 

4. 0 possessor of riches, render sharp our weapons, 
rejoice the minds of our foot-soldiers. 0 slayer of Vritra, 
let the triumphant shout of our fleet horsemen and triumphant 
chariots rise .aloft. (Be with) our people, 0 Indra, when 
they come up to th_e standards of the enemy, and let our 
arrows gain the victory: let our heroes be superior, and let 
the gods be our preservers in the battle. 0 Maruts, envelope 
that hostile army of enemies, contending against- us, in such 
activity-paralyzing darkness that one man shall not know 

another. 
5. 0 Sin-maintaining goddess,* do thou remove far (from 

• This 1s a kind of penomficatiun of Sin, 




us), and, infatuating their minds, s~ize the limhs (of our 
foes); and, coming up to them, utterly consume their hearts 
with grief, and let murky darkness gather around our foes: 
0 heroes, go forward and conquer, and may lndra confet oo' 
you felicity; let your arm be firm and invincible, as }'OIi' 
yourselves are ; having prepared your incantation-whetted, 
foe-destroying (arrows), cast them on the enemy; advance 

with a. quick pace upon the foe, and leave not a whit of them. 
6. Let the swift-flying herons, 0 lndra, come to them ; 

let their army become a feast to the kite. Save none of 
them, (not even the pious;) a9 to the sinner, he cannot be 
saved: let the birds gather around and prey on the whole of 
them. 0 possessor of riches, let the enemy's army be sur-
rounded with opponents, and do ye two, lndra and Agni, 
entirely consume it; where fall the arrows like boys without 

a queue, there let Brahma1,1aspati and A'ditya give us pros• 
perity, always grant us prosperity. 

7. 0 slayer of V ritra, slay the Rakshasas and all that 
fight against us, burn up the foes that encircle us, consume 
the wrath of the enemies that would destroy us. Slay those. 
that fight against us, and bring down those who wish to 
,gather an army against us. Do ye seek when the contest 
takes place for your aid, first I ndra's two arms, which are 

hrge, youthful, incapable of being- restrained, strong as the 
world-supporting elephant, and indomitable; for by them 
the might of the Asurs was subdued. 

8. I cover over all my vital parts with a coat of mail. 
0 Soma, do thou sprinkle me over with Amrita. O Varu1,1a, 

let the gods make thee the possessor of great felicity, and 
delight thee, the victorious divinity. May our enemies be-
come blind as a headless snake, and let lndra slay all the 
chiefs of those who had been consumea'by Agni. May all 
the gods slay the hateLI foe that takes up a distant position 
and desires to murder us, and let the holy verl!e be my in• 
terposing coat of mail. 




ADIIVA 1VA xxll. 

9, 0 Indra, terrible as a lion, who leaves the dtead, 
··anspiring prints of hi; feet on the mountains on which 

· he treads, do thou come to us even fnm the most distant 
regions. Having sharpened thy darting, sharp Vajra, destroy 
our enemies, and put to flight those that fight against us. 
Grant, 0 ye gods, that receive sacrifice, that we may hear 

. only what is auspicious with our ears, and see Gnly what is 
auspicious with our eyes i and may we who propitiate the 
gods arrive at the age laid down by the divinity with un-
diminished mental and bodily vigour.* May lndra, served 
with many sacrificial viands, grant 11s prosperity. May the 
nourishing Sun, who knows all things, grant u~ prosperity. 
May Tarkshya Rishi, the ring of who~e chariot-wheel could 
not be cut, grant us prosperity. [O Triune divinity !t] May 
Vrihaspati grant us prosperity. [Triune divinity! grant us 
prosperity.) 

• The Bhashya says that some authorities make this age a hundred 
and sixteen, and others a hundred a11d twenty years, 

t So I translate 0111, as the Bra.hmans say it is intend~d to reprP• 
sent the one spirit, Brahm, whn is manifested in Brahma, Vishnu, and 
S'iva, and is composed of A, U, M, their symbols, This word, however, 
I am 51111,fied is a modern addition, 

THE END, 





