THE BOOK OF CHILAM BALAM OF CHUMAYEL 

 22

I 
(THE RITUAL OF THE FOUR WORLD-QUARTERS) 

The first man of the Canul family. The white guaje, the ixculun <and> the gumbo-limbo 
are his little hut,... The logwood tree is the hut of Yaxum, the first of the men of the 
Cauich family. 

 

FIG. 1 a--Ah Muzencab, the Maya bee god. (After Lothrop.) b, A bee. 
(Codex Tro-Cortesianus, p. 83.) 

The lord of the people of the south is the first of the men of the Noh family. Ix-Kan-
tacay is the name of the first of the men of the Puch family. They guard nine rivers; they 
guard nine mountains  

The red flint stone is the stone of the red Mucencab. The red ceiba tree of abundance is 
his arbor which is set in the east. The red bullet-tree is their tree. The red zapote . . . The 
red-vine . . . Reddish are their yellow turkeys. Red toasted <corn> is their corn. 

The white flint stone is their stone in the north. The white ceiba tree of abundance is the 
arbor of the white Mucencab. White-breasted are their turkeys. White Lima-beans are 
their Lima-beans. White corn is their corn. 

The black flint stone is their stone in the west. The black ceiba tree of abundance is their 
arbor. Black speckled corn is their corn. Black tipped camotes are their camotes. Black 
wild pigeons are their turkeys. Black akab-chan is their green corn. Black beans are 
their beans. Black Lima-beans are their Lima-beans. 



 23

The yellow flint stone is the stone of the south. The ceiba tree of abundance, the yellow 
ceiba tree of abundance, is their arbor. The yellow bullet-tree is their tree. <Colored 
like> the yellow bullet-tree are their camotes. <Colored like> the yellow bullet-tree are 
the wild pigeons which are their turkeys. Yellow green corn is their green corn. Yellow-
backed are their beans . . . 11 Ahau was the katun when they carried <burdens> on their 
backs. Then the land-surveyor first came; this was Ah Ppizte who measured the leagues. 
Then there came the chacté shrub for marking the leagues with their walking sticks. 
Then he came<to> Uac-hab-nal} to pull the weeds along the leagues, when Mizcit Ahau 
came to sweep clean the leagues, when the land-surveyor came. These were long 
leagues that he measured. 

Then a spokesman was established at the head of the mat. 

Ix Noh Uc presides to the east. Ox Tocoy-moo presides to the east. Ox Pauah Ek 
presides to the east. Ah Miz presides to the east. 

Batun presides to the north. Ah Puch presides to the north. Balam-na presides to the 
north. Ake presides to the north. 

Iban presides to the west. Ah Chab presides to the west. Ah Tucuch preside to the west. 

Ah Yamas presides to the south. Ah Puch presides to the south. Cauich presides to the 
south. Ah Couoh presides to the south. Ah Puc presides to the south.  

The red wild bees are in the east. A large red blossom is their cup. The red Plumeria is 
their flower. 

The white wild bees are in the north. The white pach¢a is their flower. A large white 
blossom is their cup. 

The black wild bees are in the west. The black laurel flower is their flower. A large 
black blossom is their cup. 

The yellow wild bees are in the south. A large yellow blossom is their cup …is their 
flower.  

Then they swarmed at ¢ecuzamil in great numbers among the magueys of the land, the 
calabash trees of the land, the ceiba trees of the land and the chulul trees of the land. Kin 
Pauahtun was their priest. He commanded the numerous army which guarded Ah 
Hulneb at Tantun in Cozumel, <also> Ah Yax-ac, Chinab, and Kinich Kakmo.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 24

II. 
(THE RISE OF HUNAC CEEL TO POWER) 

Ah Itzimthul Chac was their commander at Ichcanzihoo. Uayom-chich was their priest 
at Ichcanzihoo. Canul <occupied> the jaguar-mat. The second Priest Chable was their 
ruler. Cabal Xiu was their priest. Uxmal Chac was their commander; formerly he was 
their priest. 

Then Hapay Can was brought to Chemchan. He was pierced <by an arrow> when he 
arrived at the bloody wall there at Uxmal.  

Then Chac-xib-chac was despoiled of his insignia. Zac-xib-chac and Ek Yuuan Chac 
were also despoiled of their insignia. Ix Zacbeliz was the name of the maternal 
grandmother of the Chacs. Ek Yuuan Chac was their father. Hun Yuuan Chac was their 
youngest brother; Uooh-puc was his name. There was a glyph (uooh) written on the 
palm of his hand. Then a glyph was written 

 
 
 

FIG. 2--Chac-xib-chac, the God Impersonator at Chichen Itzá. Fresco, Temple of the 
Warriors. Drawing by Ann Axtell Morris. 



 25

below his throat, was also written on the sole of his foot and written within the ball of 
the thumb of Ah Uooh-puc. The Chacs were not gods. The only true God is our Lord 
Dios; they worshipped him according to the word and the wisdom of Mayapan.  

Ah Kin Coba was their priest there in the fortress <of Mayapan>. Zulim Chan was at the 
west <gate>. Nauat was the guardian of the 

 

 
 

FIG. 3--Mexican warrior occupying the jaguar-seat. Fresco, Temple of the Warriors, 
Chichen Itzá. (After Ann Axtell Morris.) 

The translator believes that this figure is also representative of the guardians of the 
gates at Mayapan mentioned in the Chumayel. 

south gate. Couoh was the guardian of the east gate. Ah Ek was his companion. This 
was their ruler: Ah Tapay Nok Cauich was the name of their head-chief; Hunac Ceel 
was the representative of Ah Mex Cuc. Then he demanded one complete Plumeria 
flower. Then he demanded a white mat. Then he demanded a mantle faced on two sides. 



 26

Then he demanded a green turkey. Then he demanded a mottled snail. Then he 
demanded the gourds called homa.  

Whereupon they departed and arrived at Ppoole, where the remainder of the Itzá were 
increased in number; they took the women of Ppole as their mothers. Then they arrived 
at Ake; there they were born at Ake. Ake it was called here, as they said. Then they 
arrived at Alaa; Alaa was its name here, they said. Then they came to Tixchel, where 
their words and discourse were prolonged. Then they arrived at Ninum, where their 
words and conversations were many. Then they arrived at Chikin-¢onot, where their 
faces were turned to the west. Chikin-¢onot was its name here, so they said. Then they 
arrived at Tzuc-oop, where they remained apart under the Anona tree. Tzuc-op was its 
name here, so they said. Then they arrived at Tah-cab (Tahcabo), where the Itzas stirred 
the honey. Then it was drunk by X-koh-takin.   

When the honey was stirred, she drank it at Cabilneba, as it was called. Then they 
arrived/at Kikil, where they contracted dysentery. Kikil was its name here, so they said. 
Then they arrived at Panabhaa, where they dug for water. Then they came to 
Cucuchilhaa; they settled at the deep water. Then they arrived at Yalzihon; Yalzihon 
was its name here, where they settled the town. Then they arrived at Xppitah (Espita), 
also a town. Then they arrived at Kancab¢onot. They departed and arrived at ¢ula. Then 
they came to Pibhaal¢onot. Then they arrived at Tahaac, as it was called. Then they 
came to Ticooh, where they haggled for that which was dear. Ticoh was its name here. 
Then they arrived at Tikal, where they shut themselves in. Tikal was its name here. 
Then they came to Timaax, where they made complete rogues of themselves. Then they 
arrived at Buctzotz, where they covered the hair of their heads with a garment. Buctzotz 
was its name here, so they said. Then they arrived at ¢i¢ontun, where a malevolent man 
began to seize the land. It was called ¢iholtun here. Then they arrived at Yobain, where 
the crocodile bewitched them through their maternal grandfather, Ah Yamazi, their ruler 
at the seashore. Then they arrived at Zinanche, where the devil bewitched 
them. Zinanche was its name here. Then they arrived at the town of Chac. Then they 
arrived at ¢euc; their companions contended with one another. Then the maternal 
grandfather of their companions arrived to reconcile them at ¢emul, as it was called 
here. Then they arrived at Kini at the home of Xkil Itzam Pech. Their companions were 
at X¢euc when they arrived at the home of Xkil Itzam Pech, the ruler of the people of 
Kini. Then they arrived at Baca, where water was poured out for them. It was Baca here, 
so they said. Then they arrived at Zabacnail, the home of their maternal grandfather, the 
first of the men of the Na <family>; this was Chel Na, their maternal grandfather. Then 
they arrived at Tebenaa, where they remembered their mother. Then they went to Ixil. 
Then they went to Chulul. Then they went to Holtun-chable. Then they came to Itzamna 
(Itzimná). Then they came to Chubulna. Then they arrived at Caucel, where they all 
shivered with cold. It was Caucel here, so they said. Then they arrived at Ucu, where 
they said: "ya ucu." Then they went to Hunucma. Then they arrived at Kinchil. Then 
they went to <Can>kana. Then they arrived at Tixpetoncah. Then they arrived at Zahab-
balam. Then they arrived at Tahcum-chakan. Then they arrived at Tixbalche. Then they 
arrived at Uxmal. Then they departed and arrived at Tixyubak. Then they arrived at 
Munaa, where their words were soft. Then they went to Oxlochhok. Then they went to 
Chac-akal. Then they went to Xocneceh; the deer was their familiar spirit when they 
arrived. Then they went to Ppuztunich. Then they went to Pucnalchac. Then they went 
to Ppencuyut. Then they went to Paxueuet. Then they arrived at Tixaya (Xaya). Then 



 27

they arrived at Tiztiz, as it is called. Then they arrived at Chican. Then they arrived at 
Tixmeuac.   

Then they arrived at Hunacthi. Then they arrived at Titzal. Then they arrived at 
Tamuzbulna. Then they arrived at Tixcan. Then they arrived at Lop. Then they arrived 
at Cheemiuan. Then they arrived at Oxcauanka. Then they went to Zacbacelcan. Then 
they arrived at Cetelac.  

These are the names of whatever towns there were and the names of the wells, in order 
that it may be known where they passed in their march to see whether this district was 
good, whether it was suitable for settlement here. They set in order the names of the 
district according to the command of our Lord God. He it was who set the land in order. 
He created everything on earth. He set it in order also. But these were the people who 
named the district, who named the wells, who named the villages, who named the land 
because no one had arrived here in this neck of the land when we arrived here.   

Zubinche, Kaua, Cumcanul (Cuncunul), Tiemtun (Ebtun), where the precious stones 
descended, Zizal, Zacii (Valladolid), Ti¢ooc (Tesoco), where the law of the katun was 
fulfilled, Timozon, Popola, where the mat of the katun was spread, Tipixoy (Pixoy), 
Uayumhaa (Uayma), Zacbacelean, Tinum where little was said to them, Timacal, 
Popola where they counted the mat of the katun in its order, Tixmaculum where they 
interrupted with words, ¢ithaaz (¢itas), Bon-kauil, Tixmex, Kochila, Tix-xocen 
(Xocen), Chunpak, Pibahul, Tunkaaz (Tunkas), Haltunhaa, Kuxbila, ¢i¢ilche, Zitilpech, 
Chalamte where their anger was appeased, Itzamthulil (Izamal), Tipakab (Tepakam?) 
where they were united,   

Tiya (Teya), Caanzahcab, ¢i¢omtun, together with their maternal grandfather 
... ¢i¢holtun, Popola to the south of Zinanche. Then they came to Muci, Zacnicte-cheen, 
Zo¢il; here they had a council of war at Multumut, as it was called here, Mutul. 
Muxuppipp, Ake, Hoctun, where they settled at the base of the stone, Xoc-chel, Bohe, 
Zahcabhaa (Sancaba?), Tzanlahcat (Sanahcat), Human where there were noisy talk and 
rumors about them. Chalamte, Pacaxua was its name here they said. Tekit where the 
remainder of the Itzá were dispersed, Yokolcheen, Ppuuppulni-huh (Huhi?) the iguana 
was their familiar spirit when they came forth. ¢o¢il, Tiab (Teabo), Bitun-cheen. Then 
they entered Tipikal, as the well was called, after which they came up out of it. Then 
they went to Poc-huh, as the well was named, where they roasted the iguana. Then they 
went to Mani, where their language was forgotten by them. Then they arrived at Ti¢aan 
(¢am); three days they were submerged. Then they went to Ticul, Zacluum-cheen 
(Sacalum), Tixtohil-cheen (Xtohil), where they recovered their health. Then they went 
to Balam-kin, the district of the priests. Cheenchomac, Zacnicteel¢onot (Sacnicte), 
Tiyaxcab (Yaxcaba?), Uman, Oxcum, Zanhil (Samahil), Ichcanzihoo (Mérida), Ti-noh-
naa, Nohpat, Poychena, Chulul (Cholul). Then they arrived at the corner of the land, 
Cumkal (Conkal), where the corner of the district was set. Zicpach, Yaxkukul,   

Tixkokob, Cuca, Cheen-balam, Bolon-nic-xan, Ekol, Ekol was the name of the well 
here. Tixueue, Tixueue was the name of the well here. Uhumtal, <where> one part 
came. Tixkanimacal, Tixaan (Texan), Yumxul, where they took their father-in-law as 
their lord. Holtun-ake (Ake?), Acanceh, Ticooh (Tecoh), Tichahil, Tichac 
(Telchaquillo?), Mayapan the fortress, Yokol-haa. Then they went to Nabula, Tixmucuy 



 28

(Timucuy), Tixkanhube, ¢oyila (¢oyola). Then they arrived at Tizip, where their words 
and conversation were sinful. 

Then the rulers began to establish the country. There was the priest at Paloncab; there 
was the priest at Mutupul (Mutul), as it was called. The priest at Paloncab was Ah 
May; The priest at Mutul was Ah Canul, also <entitled> Uayom Chich, who spoke 
brokenly also; also the second Chable man, the man of Ichcanziho, Holtun Balam, his 
son. Then <the province of> Chakan received the quetzal. Then their associate rulers 
arrived. These rulers were the intimate associates of the rulers in Tun 11 Ahau. Then 
they established the land; then they established the country. Then they settled at 
Ichcanziho. Then came the people of Holtun-Ake; then came the people of Zabacna. 
Then the rulers came, all together. The man of Zabacna was the first of the men of the 
Na family. Then they assembled at Ichcanziho, where the official mat was, during the 
reign of Holtun Balam, there at the well, during the reign of Pochek-ix-¢oy. He was the 
first of the men of Copo; Tutul Xiu might have been there also. Chacte was the ruler, 
Chacte was the land where their rulers arrived. Teppanciz was their priest, he was 
looked upon as such. It was Ah Ppizte who measured their land. But Lubte was the land 
where they rested, there were seven leagues of land. Ah May it was who fixed the 
corners of the land, he who set the corners in their places; the sweeper who swept the 
land was Mizcit Ahau. But the land which was established for them was Hoyahelcab; 
there they came to the use of their reason. They proved their ruler, they proved their 
reason. 

Then began the introduction of tribute to them at Chichen. At Tikuch arrived the tribute 
of the four men.11 Ahau was the name of the katun when the tribute was handled. There 
at Cetelac it was assembled; there it was. Then came the tribute of Holtun Zuiua, there 
at Cetelac, where they agreed in their opinions. 13 Ahau was the name of the katun 
when the head-chiefs received the tribute. 

Then began their reign; then began their rule. Then they began to be served; then those 
who were to be thrown (into the cenote) arrived; then they began to throw them into the 
well that their prophecy might be heard by their rulers. Their prophecy did not come. It 
was Cauich, Hunac Ceel, Cauich was the name of the man there, who put out his head at 
the opening of the well on the south side. Then he went to take it. Then he came forth to 
declare the prophecy. Then began the taking of the prophecy. Then began his prophecy. 
Then they began to declare him ruler. Then he was set in the seat of the rulers by them. 
Then they began to declare him head-chief. He was not the ruler formerly; that was only 
the office of Ah Mex Cuc. Now the representative of Ah Mex Cuc was declared ruler. 
The eagle, they say, was his mother. Then, they say, he was sought on his hill. Then 
they began to take the prophecy of this ruler after it was declared. Then they began to 
set aloft the house on high for the ruler. Then began the construction of the stairway. 
Then he was set in the house on high in 13 Ahau, the sixth reign. Then began the 
hearing of the prophecy, of the news, of the setting up of Ah Mex Cuc, as he was called. 
Then he carried nearly to Baca the news of Ah Mex Cuc. He was placed there. Then he 
began to be treated as a lord; then obedience to the name of Ah Mex Cuc began. Then 
he was obeyed; then he was served there at the mouth of the well. Chichen Itzam was its 
name because the Itza went there. Then he removed the stones of the land, the stones of 
the sowed land, the place of Itzam, and they went into the water. Then began the 
introduction of misery there at Chichen Itzá. Then he went to the east and arrived at the 
home of Ah Kin Coba. 



 29

Katun 8 Ahau came. 8 Ahau was the name of the katun when their government 
occurred. Then there was a change of the katun, then there was a change of rulers.  

. . . when our rulers increased in numbers, according to the words of their priest to them. 
Then they introduced the drought. That which came was a drought, according to their 
words, when the hoofs <of the animals> burned, when the seashore burned, a sea of 
misery. So it was said on high, so it was said. Then the face of the sun was eaten; then 
the face of the sun was darkened; then its face was extinguished. They were terrified on 
high, when it burned at the word of their priest to them, when the word of our ruler was 
fulfilled at the word of their priest to them. Then began the idea of painting the exterior 
of the sun. When they heard of that, they saw the moon. Then came the rulers of the 
land. It was Ix-Tziu-nene who introduced sin to us, the slaves of the land, when he 
came. Then the law of the katun, the divination of the katun shall be fulfilled. When he 
was brought, what was your command, you, the rulers of the land? Then the law of 
another katun was introduced, at the end of the katun when Ix-Tziu-nene was brought. 
Whereupon a numerous army was seen, and they began to be killed. Then a thing of 
terror was constructed, a gallows for their death. Now began the archery of Ox-halal 
Chan. Then the rulers of the land were called. Their blood flowed, and it was taken by 
the archers. They were terrified . . . the time when the katun ended for them . . .  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 30

III 
(A PROPHECY FOR KATUN 11 AHAU)  

Katun 11 Ahau is set upon the mat, set upon the throne, when their ruler is set up. Yaxal 
Chac is its face to their ruler. The heavenly fan, the heavenly wreath and the heavenly 
bouquet shall descend. The drum and rattle of the lord of 11 Ahau shall resound, when 
flint knives are set into his mantle. At that time there shall be the green turkey; at that 
time there shall be Zulim Chan; at that time there shall be Chakanputun. They shall find 
their food among the trees; they shall find their food among the rocks, those who have 
lost their <usual> food in katun 11 Ahau. 

11 Ahau is the beginning of the count, because this was the katun when the foreigners 
arrived. They came from the east when they arrived. Then Christianity also began. The 
fulfilment of its prophecy is <ascribed> to the east. The katun is established at 
Ichcaanzihoo.  

This is a record of the things which they did. After it had all passed, they told of it in 
their <own> words, but its meaning is not plain. Still the course of events was as it is 
written. But even when everything shall be thoroughly 

 
 

FIG. 4--The drum and rattle of the katun resound. Fresco at Santa Rita, British 
Honduras. 

(After Gann, 1900, Plate 31. Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution.) 

explained, perhaps not so much is written about it, nor has very much been written of 
the guilt of their conspiracies with one another. So it was with the ruler of the Itzá, with 



 31

the men <who were rulers> of Izamal, Ake, Uxmal, Ichcanziho <and> Citab Couoh 
also. Very many were the head-chiefs and many a conspiracy they made with one 
another. But they are not made known in what is <written> here; not so much will be 
related. Still he who comes of our lineage will know it, one of us who are Maya men. 
He will know how to explain these things when he reads what is here. When he sees it, 
then he will explain the adjustment of the intricacy of the katun by our priest, Ah Kin 
Xuluc; but Xuluc was not his name formerly. It was only because these priests of ours 
were to come to an end when misery was introduced, when Christianity was introduced 
by the real Christians. Then with the true God, the true Dios, came the beginning of our 
misery. It was the beginning of tribute, the beginning of church dues, the beginning of 
strife with purse-snatching, the beginning of strife with blow-guns, the beginning of 
strife by trampling on people, the beginning of robbery with violence, the beginning of 
forced debts, the beginning of debts enforced by false testimony, the beginning of 
individual strife, a beginning of vexation, a beginning of robbery with violence. This 
was the origin of service to the Spaniards and priests, of service to the local chiefs, of 
service to the teachers, of service to the public prosecutors by the boys, the youths of the 
town, while the poor people were harassed. These were the very poor people who did 
not depart when oppression was put upon them. It was by Antichrist on earth, the 
kinkajous of the towns, the foxes of the towns, the blood-sucking insects of the town, 
those who drained the poverty of the working people. But it shall still come to pass that 
tears shall come to the eyes of our Lord God. The justice of our Lord God shall descend 
upon every part of the world, straight from God upon Ah Kantenal, Ix Pucyola, the 
avaricious hagglers of the world. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 32

IV 
(THE BUILDING OF THE MOUNDS) 

In the year 1541.  

181 ¢uul. at. 5 Dik: 92 nhele  

The history which I have written of how the mounds came to be constructed by the 
heathen. During three score and fifteen katuns they were constructed. The great men 
made them. Then the remainder of the men went to Cartabona, as the land where they 
were is called today. There they were when San Bernabé came to teach them. Then they 
were killed by the men; the men were called heathen. 1<5>56 is the total count today 
<after> fifteen years. On this day I have written how the great mounds came to be built 
by the lineages and all the things which the rulers did. They were the ones who built the 
mounds. <It took> thirteen katuns and six years for them to construct them. The 
following was the beginning of the mounds they built. Fifteen four-hundreds were the 
scores of their mounds, and fifty <more> <made> the total count of the mounds they 
constructed all over the land. From the sea to the base of the land they created names for 
them as well as for the wells. Then a miracle was performed for them by God. Then 
they were burned by fire among the people of Israel. <This is> the record of the katuns 
and years since Chac-unezcab of the lineage of the Tutul Xius departed from Viroa.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 33

V 
(MEMORANDA CONCERNING THE HISTORY OF YUCATAN) 

A record of the katuns and years when the Province of Yucatan was first seized by the 
foreigners, the white men. It was, they say, in Katun 11 Ahau that they seized the port 
of Ecab. They came from the east when they arrived. They say they were the first to eat 
the pond-apple for breakfast, this was the reason they called them the foreigners who ate 
pond-apples; foreigners who sucked pond-apples, they were called. This is the name of 
the householder whom they seized at Ecab, Nacom Balam was his name. He was the 
first to be seized at Ecab by the first <Spanish> captain, Don Juan de Montejo, the first 
conqueror. It was still the same katun when they arrived at Ichcanziho (Merida).  

It was the year 1513 in Katun 13 Ahau that they seized Campeche. They were there one 
katun. Ah Kin Camal from Campeche introduced the foreigners into the province here. 

It was on August 20th in the year 1541, I have made known the name of the year when 
Christianity began. 

In the year 1519, after seven score and eleven years, occurred the agreement with the 
foreigners, according to which we paid for the war between the foreigners and the other 
men here in the towns. It was the captains of the towns <who made war>. It is we who 
pay for it today. 

Today I have written down that in the year 1541 the foreigners first arrived from the 
east at Ecab, as it was called. In that year occurred their arrival at the port of Ecab, at the 
village of Nacom Balam, on the first day of the year in which Katun 11 Ahau <fell>. 
After the Itzá were dispersed, it was fifteen score years when the foreigners arrived. <It 
was> after the town of Zaclahtun was depopulated, after the town of Kinchil Coba was 
depopulated, after the town of Chichen Itzá was depopulated, after the town on the 
Uxmal side <of the range of hills>, the great town of Uxmal as it is called, was 
depopulated, as well as Kabah. It was after the towns of Zeye, Pakam,  Homtun, at the 
town of Tix-calom-kin, and Ake, Holtun Ake, were depopulated. 

It was after the town of Emal Chac was depopulated, Izamal, where the daughter of the 
true God, Lord of Heaven, descended, the Queen, the Virgin, the miraculous One. When 
the ruler said: "The shield of Kinich Kakmo shall descend," he was not declared ruler 
here. It was she, the miraculous one, the merciful one, who was so declared here. "The 
rope shall descend, the cord shall descend from heaven. The word shall descend from 
heaven." There was rejoicing over his reign by the other towns when they said this, but 
he was not declared their ruler at Emal (Izamal?).  

Then the great Itzá went <away>. Thirteen four-hundreds were the four-hundreds of 
their thousands, and fifteen four-hundreds, the four-hundreds of their hundreds, the 
leading men among them, the heathen Itzá. But many supporters went with them to feed 
them. Thirteen measures of corn per head was their quota, and nine measures and three 
handsful of grain. From many small towns the magicians went with them also.  

They did not wish to join with the foreigners; they did not desire Christianity. They did 
not wish to pay tribute, did those whose emblems were the bird, the precious stone, the 
flat precious stone and the jaguar, those with the three magic <emblems>. Four four-



 34

hundreds of years and fifteen score years was the end of their lives; then came the end 
of their lives, because they knew the measure of their days. Complete was the month; 
complete, the year; complete, the day; complete, the night; complete, the breath of life 
as it passed also; complete, the blood, when they arrived at their beds, their mats, their 
thrones. In due measure did they recite the good prayers; in due measure they sought the 
lucky days, until they saw the good stars enter into their reign; then they kept watch 
while the reign of the good stars began. Then everything was good. 

Then they adhered to <the dictates of> their reason. There was no sin; in the holy faith 
their lives <were passed>. There was then no sickness; they had then no aching bones; 
they had then no high fever; they had then no smallpox; they had then no burning chest; 
they had then no abdominal pains; they had then no consumption; they had then no 
headache. At that time the course of humanity was orderly. The foreigners made it 
otherwise when they arrived here. They brought shameful things when they came. They 
lost their innocence in carnal sin; they lost their innocence in the carnal sin of Nacxit 
Xuchit, in the carnal sin of his companions. No lucky days were then displayed to us. 
This was the origin of the two-day chair (or throne), of the two-day reign; this was the 
cause of our sickness also. There were no more lucky days for us; we had no sound 
judgment. At the end of our loss of vision, and of our shame, everything shall be 
revealed. There was no great teacher, no great speaker, no supreme priest, when the 
change of rulers occurred at their arrival. Lewd were the priests, when they came to be 
established here by the foreigners. Furthermore they left their descendants here at 
Tancah (Mayapan). These then received the misfortunes, after the affliction of these 
foreigners. These, they say, were the Itzá. Three times it was, they say, that the 
foreigners arrived. It was because of this that we were relieved from paying tribute at 
the age of sixty, because of the affliction by these men, the Itzá. It was not we who did 
it; it is we who pay for it today. However there is at last an agreement so that there may 
be peace between us and the foreigners. Otherwise there will be a great war. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 35

VI 
(NOTES ON THE CALENDAR) 

 
The beginning of Katun 11 Ahau was in the year 1513  
 
Then it ended. 
 
Tihoo (Merida) was begun in the year 1519  
 
(The convent of) San Francisco was founded at Santiago in Tihoo 1519 
 
The principal church was founded in the center of the town of <Ti>hoo in the year 1540 
 
The months in a year are twelve 12 
 
The count of the days in one year 365 
 
The count of the nights in one year 365 
 
The count of weeks in one year 52 
 
The number of Sundays in one year 53 
 
The count of the days in the first six months (of the year) 181  
 
The count of days in the second six months which complete the year 184 
 
This is the count of days in a week: seven days in one week is the total of this count.  
 
The count of the uinals in one year. 

Chumayel, 28, is born the god-daughter, Micaela Castañeda   

 
 

  

  

  



 36

 

Poop--July 16th. 

 

Yaax--January 12th. The time is good for 
gathering the ears of corn. 

 

Uoo--August 5th. 

 

Zac.--February 1st, when the white 
<flowers> bloom. 

 

Zip-August 25th. 

 

Ceeh--February 21st. 

 

Zo¢--September 14th. 
 

Mac--March 13th when the turtles lay 
their eggs. 



 37

 

Zec--October 4th. 

 

Kankin--April 2d. 

 

Xul--October 24th, when the fish spawn. 

 

Muan--April 22nd, when there is a ring 
around the sun in the sky.  

 

¢eyaxkin --November 13th. The corn-stalks are 
bent double.  

Paax--May 12th. 

 

Mol--December 3rd. 

 

Kayab--June 1st. 



 38

 

Cheen--December 23rd. 

 

Cumku--June 21st. The five 
days<called>Uayabhaab. 

FIG. 5--The Maya months, or uinals. 
(Chumayel MS.)  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 39

VII 
(THE ARMORIAL BEARINGS OF YUCATAN)  

 
 

 
 

FIG. 6--The armorial bearings of Yucatan. 
(Chumayel MS.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 



 40

VIII 
(NOTES ON ASTRONOMY) 

(Small picture of a cross.)   

When the eleventh day of June shall come, it will be the longest day. When the 
thirteenth day of September comes, this day and night are precisely the same <in 
length>. When the twelfth day of December shall come the day is short, <but> the night 
<begins to> shorten. When the tenth day of March comes, the day and night will be 
equal <in length.> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This annulus in the center of the disk is white and indicates the course of the sun. 
Between the two rings the black spots indicate the face of the sun, which goes over the 
large black one and descends to the small black one. Thus its movement is uniform, and 
this is its course here on earth also. On the ground it is thus manifested plainly all over 
the earth also. The progress of the sun is truly great as it takes its course to enter into the 
great Oro extended over the world. <This is> the record <of the motion> of the sun as it 
is known here on earth.   

 
 
 
 

 
FIG. 7.--Diagram showing the course of the sun in the heavens (Chumayel MS.). 



 41

 

FIG. 8--Diagram representing an eclipse of the sun 
(Chumayel MS.). 

 To the people on the sides of this half-section as pictured, the sun is not eclipsed; but 
for anyone who is in the middle it is eclipsed. It is in conjunction with the moon when it 
is eclipsed. It travels in its course before it is eclipsed. It arrives in its course to the 
north, very great. It is all the same with eclipses of the sun and moon before it arrives 
opposite to the sun. <This is> the explanation so that Maya people may know what 
happens to the sun and to the Moon. 

 

FIG. 9--Diagram explaining the cause of solar and lunar eclipses (Chumayel MS.).  



 42

IX 
(THE INTERROGATION OF THE CHIEFS) 

This is the language of Zuyua and the understanding for our lord, Señor Governor 
Mariscal, who has settled at Tzuc-uaxim to the east of Ichcanziho (Merida). This is the 
land where his garden and homestead were, where he settled. Then the day will come 
when his period of office shall end also. The command of the head-chief comes. 
Vigorous is his command, when he arrives, and red is his garment also. 

On this day, in the language of Zuyua, this is the 
question asked by the head-chief of the town; then the 
day shall arrive when the law of Katun 3 Ahau shall 
end, when another katun shall be set <in its place>, 
Katun 1 Ahau, as stated below. 

 

 

This katun today is Katun 3 Ahau. The time has come 
for the end of its rule and reign. It is finished. Another 
one <takes its place> for a time. 

 

 

This is Katun 1 Ahau, which is set within the house of 
Katun 3 Ahau. There it is its guest, while it is given its 
power by Katun 3 Ahau. Things are shameful, they 
say, <in the place> where they dwell.  

 
FIG. 10--The lord of the 
katun(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 11--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 12--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 



 43

 

This is the examination which takes place in the katun 
which ends today. The time has arrived for examining 
the knowledge of the chiefs of the towns, <to see> 
whether they know how the ruling men came, whether 
they have explained the coming of the chiefs, of the 
head-chiefs, whether they are of the lineage of rulers, 
whether they are of the lineage of chiefs, that they 
may prove it.  

This is the first question which will be asked of them: 
he shall ask them for his food "Bring the sun." This is 
the word of the head-chief to them; thus it is said to 
the chiefs. "Bring the sun, <my> son, bear it on the 
palm of your hand to my plate. A lance is planted, a 
lofty cross, in the middle of its heart. A green jaguar is 
seated over the sun to drink its blood." Of Zuyua is 
the wisdom. This is what the sun is which is 
demanded of them: a very large fried egg. This is the 

lance and the lofty cross planted in its heart of which he speaks: it is the 
benediction. This is what the green jaguar is which is set over it to drink its blood: it is a 
green chile-pepper, is the jaguar. This is the language of Zuyua. 

This is the second question that will be asked of them: 
let them go and get the brains of the sky, so the head-
chief may see how large they are. "It is my desire to 
see them; let me see them." This is what he would say 
to them. This is what the brains of the sky are: it is 
copal gum. Zuyua <language>.   

 

This is the third question which will be asked of them: 
let them construct a large house. Six thils is its length., 
one such <measure> is that of its upright timbers. This 
is what the large house is: it is a very large hat set on 
the floor. He shall be told to mount a very large white 
horse. White shall be his mantle and his cape, and he 
shall grasp a white rattle in his hand, while he rattles it 
at his horse. There is coagulated blood on the 

rosette of his rattle, which comes out of it. This is what the white horse is: it is a stirrup 
of henequen fiber. This is the white rattle mentioned, and the white cape: they are a 
Plumeria flower <and> a white wreath. This is the coagulated blood on the rosette of the 
rattle, which is demanded of them: it is the gold in the middle, because it is blood which 
comes from the veins of the fatherless and motherless orphan. 

 
FIG. 13--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 14--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 15--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 16--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 



 44

This is the fourth question which will be asked of 
them: Let them go to his house and then they shall be 
told: "When you come, you shall be visible at midday. 
You shall be children again, you shall creep <again>. 
When you arrive, your little dog shall be just behind 
you. This little dog of yours carries with its teeth the 
soul of our holy mistress, when you come with it." 
This is what the second childhood at midday is, which 
is mentioned to him. He shall go where he casts a 
shadow, this is what is called creeping. Then he shall 

come to the house of the head-chief. This is what his little dog is which is demanded of 
him: it is his wife. This is what the soul of our holy mistress is: it is an enormous thick 
wax candle. <This is> the language of Zuyua. 

This is the fifth question which will be asked of them. 
They shall be told to go and get the heart of God the 
Father in heaven. "Then you shall bring me thirteen 
layers wrapped up in a coarse white fabric." This is 
the heart of God the Father, of which they are told: it 
is a bead of precious stone. This is what the covering 
of thirteen layers is, which is mentioned. It is an 
enormous tortilla. Thirteen layers of beans are in it. 
This is what the coarse white fabric is, it is a white 
mantle. This shall be demanded of them, as signified 
<in the language> of Zuyua. 

This is the sixth question which will be asked of them: 
to go and get the branch of the pochote tree, and a 
cord of three strands, and a living liana. This he will 
relish. "My food for tomorrow. It is my desire to eat 
it." It is not bad to gnaw the trunk of the pochote tree, 
so they are told. This is what the trunk of the pochote 
tree is: it is a lizard. This is the cord of three strands, 
the tail of an iguana. This is the living liana, it is the 
entrails of a pig. This is the trunk of the pochote tree, 
the base of the tail of a lizard. The language of Zuyua. 

 
FIG. 17--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel M.S.). 

 
FIG. 18--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 19--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 



 45

This is the seventh question which will be asked of 
them. They shall be told: "Go and gather for me those 
things which plug the bottom of the cenote, two white 
ones, two yellow ones. I desire to eat them." These are 
the things which plug the bottom of the cenote, which 
are demanded of them. They are <two> white and two 
yellow jícamas. These are the things to be understood 
in order to become chiefs of the town, when they are 
brought before the ruler, the first head-chief.   

These are the words. If they are not understood by the 
chiefs of the towns, ill-omened is the star adorning the 
night. Frightful is its house. Sad is the havoc in the 
courtyards of the nobles. Those who die are those who 

do not understand; those who live will understand it. This competitive test shall hang 
over the chiefs of the towns; it has been copied so that the severity may be known in 
which the reign is to end. Their hands are bound before them to a wooden collar. They 
are pulled along with the cord. They are taken to the house of the ruler, the first head-
chief. This is the end of the chiefs. This shall hang over  the unrestrained lewd ones of 
the day and of the katun. They shall feel anguish when the affairs of the chiefs of the 
towns shall come to an end. This shall occur on the day when the law of the katun shall 
come to an end, when Katun 3 Ahau shall terminate. The chiefs of the towns shall be 
seized because they are lacking in understanding.  

Thus shall occur the seizure of the chiefs of 
the towns. This is the memorandum so that 
they may give the first head-chief his food, 
when he demands his food of them. They 
shall be hung by the neck; the tips of their 
tongues shall be cut off: their eyes shall be 
torn out. On this day the end shall come. 

But those who are of the lineage shall come 
forth before their lord on bended knees in 
order that their wisdom may be made known. 
Then their mat is delivered to them and their 
throne as well. The test is to be seen as it is 
copied here. Those of the lineage of the first 
head-chief here in the land are viewed with 
favor. They shall live on that day, and they 

shall also receive their first wand of office. Thus are those of the lineage of Maya men 
established again in the Province of Yucatan. God shall be first, when all things are 
accomplished here on earth. He is the true ruler, he shall come to demand of us our 
government, those things which we hold sacred, precious stones, precious beads; and he 
shall demand the planted wine, the balché. He who has none shall be killed. He who 
obeys, godly is his action according to the law. But perhaps God will not desire all the 
things which have been written to come to pass.   

 
FIG. 20--The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 

 
FIG. 21--''The chiefs of the towns shall be 

seized because they are lacking 
in understanding'' (Chumayel MS.). 



 46

So, also, these are the nobility, the lineage of the chiefs, who know whence come the 
men and the rulers of their government. The discretion with which they govern their 
subjects shall be viewed with favor. Their mat and 

their throne shall be delivered to them by 
our lord, the first head-chief. This is their 
mat and their throne. <But> the 
unrestrained upstart of the day and katun, 
the offspring of the mad woman, the 
offspring of the harlot, the son of evil, the 
two-day occupant of the mat, the two-day 
occupant of the throne, the rogue of the 
reign, the rogue of the katun, he shall be 
roughly handled, his face covered with 
earth, trampled into the ground, and 
befouled, as he is dragged along. <On the 
other hand>, the ruling men of noble 
lineage have walked abroad in Katun 3 
Ahau; <they are> placated in the fullness of 
their hearts when they are told to go and 
take the chiefs of the towns. Then let them 
go and take them. 

"Son, go and bring the flower of the night to 
me here." This is what will be said. Then let 
him go on his knees before the head-chief 
who demands this of him. "Father, here is 
the flower of the night for which you ask 
me; I come with it and with the vile thing of 
the night. There it is with me." These are his 
words. 

"Then, <my> son, if it is with you, have you with you the first captive and the great 
álamo tree?" "Father, they are with me. I have come with them." 

"Then, <my> son, if you have come with them, go and call your companions to me. 
These are an old man with nine sons and an old woman with nine children." "Father," 
he says when he replies, "I have come with them. Here they are with me. First they 
came to me, and then I came to see you." 

"Then, <my> son, if they are here with you, go and gather for me stones of the savannah 
and come with them." He gathers them to his breast when he comes. "Are you a head-
chief? Are you of the lineage of the ruler here in the land?" The language of Zuyua. 

This is the flower of the night which is demanded of him: a star in the sky. This is the 
vile thing of the night: it is the moon. This is the first woman captive and the great 
álamo tree: it is the town official, named "he who falls to the ground." This is the old 
man with nine sons who is demanded of him: it is his great toe. This is the old woman 

 
FIG. 22--The examining head-chief, 

or halach-uinic 
(Chumayel MS.). 



 47

demanded of him: it is his thumb. These are the stones of the savannah which are sought 
for and which his son is to gather to his breast: they are quails.  

"Also, <my> son, where is the smooth green thing of which you were told? You were 
not told to look at its face." Here it is with me, father." "Then, <my> son, go and bring 
to me here the placenta of the sky. When you come from the east, you shall come with 
something close behind you." "So be it, father," he says. 

This is what the smooth green thing is, which is with him when he arrives: it is the rind 
of a squash. This is the placenta of the sky which is demanded of him: it is moulded 
copal-gum shaped into thirteen layers. This is what is said to come close behind him: it 
is the shadow at his back early in the afternoon. 

"<My> son, you are a head-chief; you are a ruler also. Go and get me the green beads 
with which you pray."   

These are the green beads which are demanded of him: it is a bead of precious stone. 
Then he shall be asked how many days he prays. "Father," he says, "for one day I pray, 
and for ten days I pray." "On what day does your prayer arise?" "Father, on the ninth 
day and on the thirteenth day. It is to Bolon-ti-ku and Oxlahun-ti-citbil that I count my 
beads." 

"<My> son, go and get me your loin-cloth that I may perceive its odor here with the 
wide spread odor of my loin-cloth, the odor of my mantle, the odor of my censer, the 
supreme odor at the center of the sky, at the center of the clouds, <also> that which 
glues together my mouth, it is in a white carved <cup>. <Do this> if you are a head-
chief." "Father, I will bring them," he says. 

This is the odor of the loin-cloth which he asks for, this is the supreme odor at the center 
of the sky: it is copal gum set on fire <so that> it burns. This is what first glues together 
his mouth: it is ground cacao, chocolate. 

"Then, <my> son, go bring me the green blood of my daughter, also her head, her 
entrails, her thigh, and her arm; also that which I told you to enclose in an unused jar, as 
well as the green stool of my daughter. Show them to me. It is my desire to see them. I 
have commissioned you to set them before me, that I may burst into weeping." "So be 
it, father." He <is to> come with the left ear of a wild bee. Then let him go. 

This is the green blood of his daughter for which he asks: it is Maya wine. These are the 
entrails of his daughter: it is an empty bee-hive. This is his daughter's head: it is an 
unused jar for steeping wine. This is what his daughter's green stool is: it is the stone 
pestle for <pounding> honey. This is what the left ear of the wild bee is: it is <a drop 
of> the moisture of the wine. This is what the bone of his daughter is: it is the flexible 
bark of the balché. This is the thigh of which he speaks: it is the trunk of the balché tree. 
This is what the arm of his daughter is: it is the branch of the balché. This is what he 
calls weeping: it is a drunken speech. Then let him go and give these <things> to him. 
Let him seat himself tranquilly; let him wait for him to speak; let him salute him as his 
lord when he arrives. 



 48

"Father, here is your daughter whom you put in my care. of whom you speak. You are 
the father, you are the ruler." This is what his son says to him. 

"Oh son, my fellow head-chief, my fellow ruler! You have remembered; it is sufficient. 
You know; it is sufficient," he says. "This, then, is the blood of my daughter for which I 
ask you." Thirteen times the blood of his daughter flows, while he weeps for his 
daughter, lying there in the courtyard. Perchance, then he weeps, while he looks at her, 
bowed down, while he says: "Oh son!" he says while he weeps, "you are a head-chief. 
Oh son, you are a ruler also. Oh my fellow head-chief, I will deliver your mat and your 
throne and your authority to you, son; yours is the government, yours is the authority 
also, <my> son." 

Thus, then, the chiefs of the towns are to obey him when they depart with the first/head-
chief, there at the head of the province. Then let them go to his house. There they are at 
his house, when they give his food to the head-chief, and when he asks them for his 
food, as he shall specify in its order. 

"Son, bring me four cardinals which are at the mouth of the cave. They are to be set 
over the first thing which glues together my mouth. It is to be red, that which I call the 
crest over the first thing which glues together my mouth, when it shall be brought before 
me." "It is well, father." What he asks for are little cakes of achiote. This is the crest of 
which he speaks: it is the froth on the chocolate. This is what first glues together his 
mouth: it is cacao which has been ground. <The language of> Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me the bird of the night and the drilled <stone> of the night, and with them 
the brains of the sky. Great is my desire to see them here." "It is well, father." What he 
wants is a stick used to scrape copal gum <from the tree>. This the drilled <stone> of 
the night for which he asks, a bead of precious stone. The brains of the sky are copal 
gum. Language of Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me the bone of your father whom you buried three years ago. Great is my 
desire to see it." "It is well, father." This is what he wants, it is cassava baked in a pit. 
Then let him go and give it to the head-chief. 

"Son, bring me an old man whose coat is not buttoned, Homtochac is his name." "It is 
well, father." What he asks for is a nine-banded armadillo, a female armadillo. 

"Son, bring me three segments split from the sky. I desire to eat them." "Even so, 
father."   

This is what he demands, it is atole shaken to a froth, the froth of atole (maize gruel). 
Everything is asked in the language of Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me a stock of maguey, the thick stalk of the maguey without branches. Do 
not remove its tip. Also bring with it three strands of ravelled cord." "It is well, father." 
This is what he asks for, a hog's head baked in a pit. Then he shall go and give it to him. 
The tip of which he speaks is its tongue, because its tip is fresh and tender.  

"Son, bring me the hawks of the night for me to eat." It is well, father." What he asks for 
are chickens, cocks. 



 49

"Son, say to the first female captive, called Otlom-cabal, to bring me a basket of 
blackbirds caught beneath the great álamo tree, heaped up there in the shadow of the 
álamo." "Even so, father." What he asks for are some black beans that are in the house 
of the town official, that is, the so-called first female captive and the thing which falls 
limply to the ground of which he speaks. Language of Zuyua. 

"Son, go and catch the jaguar of the cave, so that by means of you it may give savour to 
my food. I desire to eat the jaguar." "It is well, father." This is the jaguar for which he 
asks, it is an agouti. The language of Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me seven coverings of the fatherless <orphan>. It is my desire to eat them at 
the time when they should be eaten." "Even so, father." This is what he asks for, it is the 
pressed <leaves of the> chaya.  

"Son, bring me the green gallants here. Let them come and dance, that I may look on 
with pleasure. Let them come with drum and rattle, fan and drum-stick. I am expecting 
them." "Even so, father." What he asks for is a turkey-cock. The drum is its crop. The 
rattle is its head. The fan is its tail. The drum-stick is its leg. The language of Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me the fanciful desire of the district. I desire to eat it." What he asks for is 
clarified honey. <The language of> Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me a stone from burned over land, it is burning hot. Bring with it the liquor 
for me to extinguish it, so it will crack here before me." What he wants is a macal baked 
in a pit. The liquor to extinguish it is clarified honey. The language of Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me the firefly of the night. Its odor shall pass to the north and to the west. 
Bring with it the beckoning tongue of the jaguar." "It is well, father." What he asks for 
is a smoking tube filled with tobacco. The beckoning tongue of the jaguar for which he 
asks is fire. 

"Son, bring me your daughter that I may see her. Pale is her face and very beautiful. 
White are her head-covering and her sash. I greatly desire her." tilt is well, father." 
What he asks for is a white calabash cup <filled> with atole. The language of Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me the thing called zabel. Fragrant is its odor." "Even so, father." This is 
what he asks for, it is a melon. 

"Son, bring me the green curved neck, it is bright green along the back. I desire to eat 
it." "It is well, father." What he asks for is the neck of a turkey-cock. <Language of> 
Zuyua. 

"Son, bring me a woman with a very white and well rounded calf. Here will I tuck back 
the skirt from her calf." "It is well, father." He wants a jícama. This is what tucking back 
the skirt is: it is peeling the skin. 

"Son, bring me a very beautiful woman with a very white countenance. I greatly desire 
her. I will cast down her skirt and her loose dress before me." "It is well, father." This is 
what he asks for, it is a turkey-hen for him to eat. Casting down her skirt and loose dress 
means plucking its feathers. Then let it be roasted for eating. The language of Zuyua. 



 50

"Son, bring to me here a farmer, an old man. I wish to see his face." "Even so, father." 
What he asks for is a cucut-macal to eat. <This is> the questionnaire. 

"Son, bring me a farmer's wife, an old woman, a dark colored person. She is seven 
palms across the hips. It is my desire to see her." What he wants is the green fruit of a 
squash-vine. The language of Zuyua. 

The day shall come. 

On this day our lord, the first head-chief, trampled them under foot, when he arrived 
here in the land, in the land of Yucalpeten. He calls the chiefs, and the chiefs shall 
come. They are called by our lord, the first head-chief. "Are you chieftains?" "We are, 
<my> lord." These are their words. 

"Sons, if you are head-chiefs here in the land," they shall be told, "go and get the 
winged jaguar, and then come and give it to me to eat. Put his bead collar on him 
properly, put on his crest properly, and come and give him to me to eat. Go immediately 
today, and come soon. Sons, I greatly desire to eat him. You are <my> sons, you are 
head-chiefs." Those who are ignorant shall be sad at heart and in countenance. They 
shall say nothing. But those who know shall be cheerful when they go to get the winged 
jaguar. Then he shall come with it. "Is it you, son?" "It is I, father." "Are you of the 
lineage, son?" "Indeed I am, father." "Where are your companions, son?" "Father, they 
are in the forest seeking the jaguar." The jaguar, as they call it, does not exist, but let 
him bring it before him. This jaguar for which he asks is the chief's horse which he 
wishes to eat. It is a horse raised about the house. This is the bead collar: it is its little 
bells. This is its crest: it is a red thread. It is to be completely saddled and bridled. The 
language of Zuyua.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 51

X 
(THE CREATION OF THE WORLD)  

It is most necessary to believe this. These are the precious stones which our Lord, the 
Father, has abandoned. This was his first repast, this balché, with which we, the ruling 
men revere him here. Very rightly they worshipped as true gods these precious 
stones, when the true God was established, our Lord God, the Lord of heaven and earth, 
the true God. Nevertheless, the first gods were perishable gods. Their worship came to 
its inevitable end. They lost their efficacy by the benediction of the Lord of Heaven, 
after the redemption of the world was accomplished, after the resurrection of the true 
God, the true Dios, when he blessed heaven and earth. Then was your worship 
abolished, Maya men. Turn away your hearts from your <old> religion. 

<This is> the history of the world in those times, because it has been written down, 
because the time has not yet ended for making these books, these many explanations, so 
that Maya men may be asked if they know how they were born here in this country, 
when the land was founded. 

It was <Katun> 11 Ahau when the Ah Mucenca  came 
forth to blindfold the faces of the Oxlahun-ti-ku;  but 
they did not know his name, except for his older sister 
and his sons. They said his face had not yet been 
shown to them also. This was after the creation of the 
world had been completed, but they did not know it 
was about to occur. Then Oxlahun-ti-ku was seized by 
Bolon-ti-ku. Then it was that fire descended, then the 
rope descended, then rocks and trees descended. Then 
came the beating of <things> with wood and stone. 

Then Oxlahun-ti-ku was seized, his head was wounded, his face was buffeted, he was 
spit upon, and he was <thrown> on his back as well. After that he was despoiled of his 
insignia and his smut. Then shoots of the yaxum tree were taken. Also Lima beans were 
taken with crumbled tubercles, hearts of small squash-seeds, large squash-seeds and 
beans, all crushed. He wrapped up the seeds <composing> this first Bolon ¢acab, and 
went to the thirteenth heaven. Then a mass of maize-dough with the tips of corn-cobs 
remained here on earth. Then its heart departed because of Oxlahun-ti-ku, but they did 
not know the heart of the tubercle was gone. After that the fatherless ones, the miserable 
ones, and those without husbands were all pierced through; they were alive though they 
had no hearts. Then they were buried in the sands, in the sea. 

There would be a sudden rush of water when the theft of the insignia <of Oxlahun-ti-
ku> occurred. Then the sky would fall, it would fall down upon the earth, when the four 
gods, the four Bacabs, were set up, who brought about the destruction of the world. 
Then, after the destruction of the world was completed, they placed <a tree > to set up 
in its order the yellow cock oriole. Then the white tree of abundance was set up. A pillar 
of the sky was set up, a sign of the destruction of the world; that was the white tree of 
abundance in the north. Then the black tree of abundance was set up <in the west> for 
the black-breasted pi¢oy to sit upon. Then the yellow tree of abundance was set up <in 
the south>, as a symbol of the destruction of the world, for the yellow-breasted pi¢oy to 
sit upon, for the yellow cock oriole to sit upon, the yellow timid mut. Then the green 

 
FIG. 23-- The lord of the katun 

(Chumayel MS.). 
The face is darkened or blurred. 



 52

tree of abundance was set up in the center <of the world> as a record of the destruction 
of the world. 

 
 

FIG. 24--Lahun Chaan, associated with the planet Venus (Dresden Codex, p. 47). 

The plate of another katun was set up and fixed in its place by the messengers of their 
lord. The red Piltec was set at the east of the world to conduct people to his lord. The 
white Piltec was set at the north of the world to conduct people to his lord. Lahun 
Chaan was set <at the west> to bring things to his lord. The yellow Piltec was set <at 
the south> to bring things to his lord. But it was <over> the whole world that Ah Uuc 
Cheknal was set up. He came from the seventh stratum of the earth, when he came to 
fecundate Itzam-kab-ain, when he came with the vitality of the angle between earth 
<and> heaven. They moved among the four lights, among the four layers of the stars. 
The world was not lighted; there was neither day nor night nor moon. Then they 
perceived that the world was being created. Then creation dawned upon the 
world.During the creation thirteen infinite series <added> to seven was the count of the 
creation of the world. Then a new world dawned for them. 

The two-day throne was declared, the three-day throne. Then began the weeping of 
Oxlahun-ti-ku. They wept in this reign. The reign became red; the mat became red; the 
first tree of the world was rooted fast. The entire world was proclaimed by Uuc-yol-zip; 
but it was not at the time of this reign that Bolon-ti-ku-wept. Then came the counting of 
the mat in its order. Red was the mat on which Bolon-ti-ku sat. His buttock is sharply 



 53

rounded, as he sits on his mat. Then descended greed from the heart of the sky, greed 
for power, greed for rule. 

Then the red foundation was established; the white foundation of the ruler was 
established; the black foundation was established; the yellow foundation was 
established. Then the Red Ruler was set up, he who was raised upon the mat, raised 
upon the throne. The White Ruler was set up, he who was raised upon the mat, raised 
upon the throne. The Black Ruler was set up, he who was raised upon the mat, raised 
upon the throne. The Yellow Ruler was set up, he who was raised upon the mat, raised 
upon the throne. As a god, it is said; whether or not gods, their bread is lacking, their 
water is lacking.  

There was only a portion <of what was needed> for them to eat together... but there was 
nowhere from which the quantity needed for existence could come. Compulsion and 
force were the tidings, when he was seated <in authority>; compulsion was the tidings, 
compulsion by misery; it came during his reign, when he arrived to sit upon the mat 
... Suddenly on high fire flamed up. The face of the sun was snatched away, taken from 
earth. This was his garment in his reign. This was the reason for mourning his power, at 
that time there was too much vigor. At that time there was the riddle for the rulers. The 
planted timber was set up. Perishable things are assembled at that time. The timber of 
the grave-digger is set up at the crossroads, at the four resting places. Sad is the general 
havoc, at that time the butterflies swarmed. Then there came great misery, when it came 
about that the sun in Katun 3 Ahau was moved from its place for three months. After 
three years it will come back into place in Katun 3 Ahau. Then another katun will beset 
<in its place>. The ramon fruit is their bread, the ramon fruit is their drink; the jícama 
cimarrona is their bread, the jícama cimarrona is their drink; what they eat and what 
they drink. The ix-batun, the chimchim-chay, are what they eat. These things were 
present here when misery settled, father, in Tun 9. At that time there were the 
foreigners. The charge <of misery> was sought for all the years of <Katun> 13 Ahau.  

Then it was that the lord of <Katun> 11 Ahau spread his feet apart. Then it was that the 
word of Bolon ¢acab descended to the tip of his tongue. Then the charge of the katun 
was sought; nine was its charge when it descended from heaven. Kan was the day when 
its burden was bound to it. Then the water descended, it came from the heart of the sky 
for the baptism of the House of Nine Bushes. With it descended Bolon Mayel; sweet 
was his mouth and the tip of his tongue. Sweet were his brains. Then descended the four 
mighty supernatural jars, this was the honey of the flowers.    

Then there grew up for it the red unfolded calyx, the white unfolded calyx, the black 
unfolded calyx and the yellow unfolded calyx, those which were half a palm <broad> 
and those which were a whole palm <in breadth>. Then there sprang up the five-leafed 
flower, the five drooping <petals>, the cacao <with grains like> a row of teeth, the ix-
chabil-tok, the little flower, Ix Macuil Xuchit, the flower with the brightly colored tip, 
the laurel flower, and the limping flower. After these flowers sprang up, there were the 
vendors of fragrant odors, there was the mother of the flowers. Then there sprang up the 
bouquet of the priest, the bouquet of the ruler, the bouquet of the captain; this was what 
the flower-king bore when he descended and nothing else, so they say. It was not bread 
that he bore. Then it was that the flower sprang up, wide open, to introduce the sin of 
Bolon-ti-ku. <After> three years was the time when he said he did not come to create 
Bolon ¢acab as the god in hell. Then descended Ppizlimtec to take the flower; he took 



 54

the figure of a humming-bird with green plumage on its breast, when he descended. 
Then he sucked the honey from the flower with nine petals. Then the five-petaled 
flower took him for her husband, Thereupon the heart of the flower came forth to set 
itself in motion. Four-fold was the plate of the flower, and Ah Kin Xocbiltun was set in 
the center. At this time Oxlahun-ti-ku came forth, but he did not know of the descent of 
the sin of the mat, when he came into his power. The flower was his mat, the flower was 
his chair. He sat in envy, he walked in envy. Envy was his plate, envy was his cup. 
There was envy in his heart, in his understanding, in his thought and in his speech. 
Ribald and insolent was his speech during his reign. At that time his food cries out, his 
drink cries out, from the corner of his mouth when he eats, from the back of his claw 
when he bites his food. He holds in his hand a piece of wood, he holds in his hand a 
stone. Mighty are his teeth; his face is that of Lahun Chan, as he sits. Sin is <in> his 
face, in his speech, in his talk, in his understanding <and in> his walk. His eyes are 
blindfolded. He seizes, he demands as his right, the mat on which he sits during his 
reign. Forgotten is his father, forgotten is his mother, nor does his mother know her 
offspring. The heart is on fire alone in the fatherless one who despises his father, in the 
motherless one. He shall walk abroad giving the appearance of one drunk, without 
understanding, in company with his father, in company with his mother. There is no 
virtue in him, there is no goodness in his heart, only a little on the tip of his tongue. He 
does not know in what manner his end is to come; nor does he know what will be the 
end of his reign, when the period of his power shall terminate. 

This is Bolon-ti-ku. <Like that of> Bolon Chan is the face of the ruler of men, the two 
day occupant of the mat and throne. He came in Katun 3 Ahau. After that there will be 
another lord of the land who will establish the law of another katun, after the law of the 
lord of Katun 3 Ahau shall have run its course. At that time there shall be few children; 
then there shall be mourning among the Itza who speak our language brokenly. Industry 
<and> vigor finally take the place, in the first tun <of the new katun>, of the sin of the 
Itzá who speak our language brokenly. It is Bolon-ti-ku who shall come to his end 
<with> the law of the lord of Katun 3 Ahau. Then the riddle of the rulers of the land 
shall end the law of the katun. Then those of the lineage of the noble chiefs shall come 
into their own, with the other men of discretion and with those of the lineage of the 
chiefs. Their faces had been trampled on the ground, and they had been overthrown by 
the unrestrained upstarts of the day and of the katun, the son of evil and the offspring of 
the harlot, who were born when their day dawned in Katun 3 Ahau. Thus shall end the 
power of those who are two-faced toward our Lord God. 

But when the law of the katun shall have run its course, then God will bring about a 
great deluge again which will be the end of the world. When this is over, then our Lord 
Jesus Christ shall descend over the valley of Jehoshaphat beside the town of Jerusalem 
where he redeemed us with his holy blood. He shall descend on a great cloud to bear 
true testimony that he was once obliged to suffer, stretched out on a cross of wood. 
Then shall descend in his great power and glory the true God who created heaven and 
earth and everything on earth. He shall descend to level off the world for the good and 
the bad, the conquerors <and> the captives.  

 
 
 
 



 55

XI 
(THE RITUAL OF THE ANGELS) 

Dominus vobiscum ended the words of their song when there was neither heaven nor 
earth. When the world was submerged, when there was neither heaven nor earth, the 
three-cornered precious stoneof grace was born, after the divinity of the ruler was 
created, when there was no heaven. Then there were born seven tuns, seven katuns, 
hanging in the heart of the wind, the seven chosen ones. Then, they say, their seven 
graces stirred also. Seven also were their holy images. While they were still untarnished, 
occurred the birth of the first precious stone of grace, the first infinite grace, when there 
was infinite night, when there was no God. Not yet had he received his Godhead. Then 
he remained alone within the grace, within the night, when there was neither heaven nor 
earth. Then he departed at the end of the katun, as he could not be born in the first 
katun. There were his long locks of hair, adeu ti paramii; his divinity came to him when 
he departed. 

Thereupon he became man in the second infinite precious stone of grace. Then there 
arrived in the second katun Alpilcon, as the angel was named when he was born. The 
second grace was permitted to depart in the second infinite night, when no one was 
present. Then he received his divinity, alone and through his own effort, when he came 
to depart. "O firmar" he said, when he received his divinity by himself and through his 
own effort. 

Thereupon he departed and went to the third infinite precious stone of grace. Alba 
Congel was the name of its angel. This was the third grace. 

Let me proceed to the fourth infinite precious stone of grace, to the fourth night. Atea 
Ohe was the name of its angel. The fourth grace was born and began to speak, alone and 
through his own effort. "Oh god, the ruler! I am after all nothing in myself." These were 
his words in his concealment, in his divinity within the grace. "Let me still proceed," he 
said. 

Then he went to the fifth infinite precious stone of grace, to the fifth infinite night. The 
fifth grace was born in the fifth katun. Thereupon he was set up to declare his divinity. 
Then his angel was born; Decipto was the name of his angel when he was set up. "Since 
it is so, let me go. Who might I be? I am a god, a ruler, after all," and he declared his 
divinity all alone. "A ninite dei sin," he said when he received his divinity all by 
himself. 

Then he went to the sixth infinite precious stone of grace, to the sixth measured night, to 
the sixth katun: "Ye gods, ye rulers! Make answer to my words. After all, I am nothing 
in myself alone." 

The seventh grace was born. Conlamil was the name of his angel. "I deliver the things 
of god to you who are gods. Answer my words. After all, there is no one; no one replies 
to my words." Thus he spoke as he caused the seventh grace to be born. And there was 
joy in his heart at the birth of the seventh katun, the seven lights, the seventh measured 
night <and> the seven infinite <things>. 



 56

Abiento bocayento de la zipil na de fente note. Sustina gracia, trece mili, uno cargo 
bende. The first, the second, the thirteenth unfolding; thirteen banners of the katuns; 
three, seven, eight thousand. Then God the Father awoke to consciousness alone in 
person; in the three-cornered precious stone of grace he awoke to consciousness, God 
the Father, as his name was known to be. Unidad and God the Father, these were his 
names, cleft from the katun for you. There were three generations suddenly augmented 
in stature when he came. Seven were the generations of his angels. Four times did he 
first speak. There was one seal in the darkness, one seal on high. "I am the beginning 
and I shall be the end." Here are his words in their mighty entirety. "Datate here to that 
which has been received. I am Unidate, I am also Unitata, I am the Dove, I am Unitata 
Anuni. Unidad cometh."   

Nilu was the name of the night. This was the first speech of God; this was the first 
speech of the Father. Of cleansed stone was his precious stone alone in the night. 
Etomas, Çipancas was the name of the wind. Hun Katun was his father. Otahocanil 
Aucangel was the name of the wind. H<i>eron was the name of the Wind. Xicluto-tu-
tanil was the name of the wind. Virtutus was the name of the wind. Joramis was the 
name of the wind in the second katun. This was what he said when he changed the 
stone: "Jaxyonlacalpa." He covered the name of the holy heaven which our holy Lord, 
the Father raised up. Bolay was the name of the serpent of the second heaven. He was in 
the dust at the feet of Sustinal Gracia, as he was called. Then Lonmias was formed. The 
sharp stone was his stone within the night. Zihontun was his stone, when these stones 
were fixed in their places. Three times they were set at the foot of Sustinal Gracia. 
These stones were born, they were beneath the one stone, the mighty pointed stone, the 
stone column, the mighty pointed clashing stone. They were manifested all over the 
world <by> God the Father, the first ruler. In the first katun was born the only son of 
God; in the second katun, the Father. In the third katun was Expleo-ucaan, as he was 
called, who chastised him named Chac Opilla when he set up the heavens. Enpileo-u-
caan was his name. Expleo was his name within the first noose of God. Hebones was 
the only son of God. <Like>a mirror he was borne astride on the shoulder of his father, 
on the stone of his father. 

Then, it is said, the boldness of the heaven on high was created. This was one grace, one 
stone; then fire was created, Tixitate was his name, the light of the heavens. Sustinal, 
they say, was the light from that which lighted the heaven. Acpa, it was, who made the 
katun after the light originated in the heavens. Alpa-u-manga was his name after it 
ended. 

<These are> the angels of the winds which were set up while he created the star, when 
the world was not yet lighted, when there was neither heaven nor earth: the Red 
Pauahtun, the White Pauahtun, the Black Pauahtun, the Yellow Pauahtun.   

Here was the first heaven where God the Father was set up, grasping in his hand his 
stone, grasping his cangel, grasping his wheel on which are hung the four angels of the 
winds. Cerpinus was the name of him who, under Orele, measured the land. They were 
three persons, God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. He set up the 
planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, which he said were held in the grasp of the god in 
heaven when he created them. This was the name of the heaven, cristalino. Here were 
the Angels. Corpinus was the name of him who held aloft on the palm of his hand the 
Blessed Father when there was neither heaven nor earth. Inpicco was his name when all 



 57

the angels were asperged. Baloyo was his name when <the water> was sprinkled. Seros 
was his name, Et sepeuas. Laus Deo. 

Below were Chac Bolay Balam and the cacao called balamté. Esperas was the name of 
the sixth heaven; Isperas was the name of the seventh heaven. Then the world was 
created by God the ruler in the seventh katun, created in the darkness named Espiritu. 
St. Edendeus <and> St. Eluceo were the saints who witnessed the birth of him who was 
hidden within the stone, hidden within the night. Se repite elitun entri de noche. These 
were the words said by him who was hidden within the stone, hidden within the night: 
Tronas Aleseyo de mundo de gracia. En apedia tejo çipi dia te en pieted gracia. Santo 
Esuleptun jam estum est gracia. Suplilis el timeo me firme abin finitis gracia, y metis 
absolutum ti metis de gracia. Abegintis gracia, Edendeo gracia, de fentis de gracia, 
fenoplis tun gracia. Locom dar yme gracia, tretris u mis gracia. Noçi luçi de gracia, in 
pricio de gracia, trese mili uno de cargo, leonte."  

One, two, thirteen, one division, thirteen bakam of katuns. Three, seven, eight thousand 
was the creation of the world, when he who was hidden within the stone, hidden within 
the night, was born, when there was neither heaven nor earth. Then God the Father 
spoke alone, by his own efforts, in the darkness that clung like a thrice withered fruit 
<to the tree>. This was the first word of God, when there was neither heaven nor earth, 
when he came out of the stone and fell into the second stone. Then it was that he 
declared his divinity. Then resounded eight thousand katuns at the word of the first 
stone of grace, the first ornamented stone of grace. It was the macaw that warmed it 
well behind the acantun.  

Who was born when our father descended? 

Thou knowest. There was born the first macaw who cast the stones behind the acantun. 

How was the grain of maize born? How, indeed, father? 

Thou knowest. The tender green <shoot> was born in heaven. 

"Ciripacte, horca mundo. Ni mompan est noche. Amanena, omonena, apa opa," <was 
said> when the wind emerged from the great stone of grace. "Cipiones ted coruna, pater 
profecido," were his words when he arrived at the seventh stratum of the solid rock of 
grace. "Bal te piones, orteçipio, reçi quenta noche. Hun ebrietate, hun cute profeciado," 
were the words of the Angel, Jerupiter. Then the sky was put in its place, Corporales ti 
ojales, by the first pope, the face of the katun, the burden of the Katun 13 Ahau. The 
face of the sun shall be turned from its course, it shall be turned face down during the 
reign of the perishable men, the perishable rulers. Five days the sun is eclipsed, and then 
shall be seen the torch of <Katun> 13 Ahau, a sign given by God that death shall come 
to the rulers/of this land. Thus it shall come about that the first rulers are driven from 
their towns. Then Christianity <shall> have come here to the land. 

Thus it is that God, our Father, gives a sign when they shall come, because there is no 
agreement. The descendants <of the former rulers> are dishonored and brought to 
misery; we are christianized, while they treat us like animals. There is sorrow in the 
heart of God because of these "suckers."   



 58

1n the year Fifteen hundred and thirty-nine, 1539, to the east was the door of the House 
of Don Juan Montejo, to introduce Christianity here to the land of Yucalpeten, Yucatan. 

Chilam Balam, the prophet.    

Thus today is not an unlucky day. . .   

This was his name, 
God the Father, 
when he came to 
exist in person, 
after the creation of 
the world and the 
earth. This was 
then his name. 

Joshua was his 
second name. In 
his third person, his 
name for the third 
time was Mesister 
in Latin, Dei in the 
vernacular. 

The Red Pauahtun was 
Utcorusis. 

The White Pauahtun 
was Corocalbo. 

The Black Pauahtun 
was Corusi-provento. 

The Yellow Pauahtun 
was Moses. 

No vis. 

No va. 

    

Messiah was the 
name of God 
before the heavens 
and the earth were 
created. Messiah 
the Christ, was his 
name. Then he 
created the Angels. 
But it was 
manifested to God 
that half of the 
Angels were 
destined to sin. 

 

FIG. 25--The name and symbols of 
God. (Chumayel MS.). 

The second name of 
God was Emanuel. To 
this was added his third 
name; this then was 
Jeremiah, his name 
when there was neither 
heaven nor earth. 

The misspelled Latin and Spanish names may have been taken from some Spanish 
treatise on astrology or magic. The decoration here is evidently borrowed from some 

Spanish religious book. 

  



 59

 
FIG. 26--Death is ruler over all. (Chumayel MS.) 

This picture is probably taken bodily from some Spanish almanac. 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 



 60

XII 
(A SONG OF THE ITZÁ) 

Damascus was the name of the plain where our first father, Adam, was created by God. 
This was his name, his first name was Adam, after his soul entered <into him>, after 
Paradise was set up. After Adam had then been created, then was created our first 
mother, Eve, the first woman, the mother of the whole world. Drops of moisture formed 
on the stones and bushes for the first time, they say, created when there was no sky. 

But <God> the Father was created alone and by his own effort in the darkness. But the 
stones were created separately. This was the land of Acantun. This was created after 
Adam was formed also. They were put in the place where the Acans are. Thus it was 
that he named them when he created them all. These were the first people. 

God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit, these are the joint <names> of 
God. They were created in the stone, the red slender stone and the worn stone of grace. 
His name is the Word, Josustin Graçia.  

However, at the same time there was born in the stone, the black stone of terror, the one 
named Verbum-tuorum, Ix-coal-tun, Ix-coal-cab, taken by the mistress of the world. 
Then there was set in its place the thrice seasoned heaven, the seasoned heaven. White 
and clean, it lay guarded in the heart of Sustinal Gracia. Thirteen orders of katuns lay 
prostrate in the stone. Then the ruler, Hunac Ceel, stirred into motion.  

The song: Ho! What is so precious as we are? It is the precious jewel <worn on the 
breast.> Ho! What is the distinction of righteous men? It is my mantle, my loin-cloth. 
So spoke the god. Then do you mourn for anyone? No one. A tender boy was I at 
Chichen, when the evil man, the master of the army, came to seize the land. Woe!  

At Chichen Itzá heresy was favored! Yulu uayano! Ho! 1 Imix was the day when the 
ruler was seized at Chikin-chen. Ho! Where thou art, there is the god. Ho! 1 Imix was 
the day he said this. At Chichen Itzá heresy was favored! Yulu uayano! Buried, 
buried! This was their cry. Buried, buried! This they also knew . . . This also was their 
cry on that first day of Yaxkin, that mighty day, 2 Akbal, they came. Woe! Woe! Woe! 
Yulu uayano! Is there perhaps anyone who by chance has awakened? Force was brought 
to bear for the second time. Woe! For the third time was established the religious 
festival of our enemies, our enemies. Uuiyao! Soon it will come to Chichen Itzá, 
<where> heresy was favored. Yulu uayano! <In> the third heaven is the sun. Behold! 
Who am I said to be among men? I am a leafy covering. Eya! Who am I among the 
people of Putun? You do not understand me. Eya! I was created in the night. What were 
we born? Eya! We were <like> tame animals <to> Mizcit Ahau. <But> an end comes to 
his roguery. Behold, so I remember my song. Heresy was favored. Yulu uayano! Eya! I 
die, he said, because of the town festival. Eya! I shall come, he said, because of the 
destruction of the town. This is the end <of what is> in his mind, of what he thought in 
his heart. Me, he did not destroy. I tell what I have remembered in my song. Heresy was 
favored. Yulu uayano! This is all of the song, the completion of the message of the Lord 
God.  

 
 



 61

XIII 
(THE CREATION OF THE UINAL)  

Thus it was recorded <by> the first sage, Melchise<dek>, the first prophet, Napuc Tun, 
the priest, the first priest. This is a song of how the uinal came to be created before the 
creation of the world. Then he began to march by his own effort alone. Then said his 
maternal grandmother, then said his maternal aunt, then said his paternal grandmother, 
then said his sister-in-law: "What shall we say when we see man on the road?" These 
were their words as they marched along, when there was no man <as yet>. Then they 
arrived there in the east and began to speak. "Who has passed here? Here are footprints. 
Measure it off with your foot." So spoke the mistress of the world. Then he measured 
the footstep of our Lord, God the Father. This was the reason it was called counting off 
the whole earth, lahca (12) Oc. This was the count, after it had been created by <the 
day> 13 Oc, after his feet were joined evenly, after they had departed there in the east. 
Then he spoke its name when the day had no name, after he had marched along with his 
maternal grandmother, his maternal aunt, his paternal grandmother and his sister-in-law. 
The uinal was created, the day, as it was called, was created, heaven and earth were 
created, the stairway of water, the earth, rocks and trees; the things of the sea and the 
things of the land were created. 

On 1 Chuen he raised himself to his divinity, after he had made heaven and earth. 

On 2 Eb he made the first stairway. It descended from the midst of the heavens, in the 
midst of the water, when there were neither earth, rocks nor trees. 

On 3 Ben he made all things, as many as there are, the things of the heavens, the things 
of the sea and the things of the earth.   

On 4 Ix sky and earth were tilted.  

On 5 Men he made everything. 

On 6 Cib the first candle was made; it became light when there was neither sun nor 
moon. 

On 7 Caban honey was first created, when we had none. 

On 8 E¢nab his hand and foot were firmly set, then he picked up small things on the 
ground. 

On 9 Cauac hell was first considered. 

On 10 Ahau wicked men went to hell because of God the Father, that they might not be 
noticed. 

On 11 Imix rocks and trees were formed; this he did within the day. 

On 12 Ik the breath of life was created. The reason it was called Ik was because there 
was no death in it. 



 62

On 13 Akbal he took water and watered the ground. Then he shaped it and it became 
man. 

On 1 Kan he first created anger because of the evil he had created. 

On 2 Chicchan occurred the discovery of whatever evil he saw within the town. 

On 3 Cimi he invented death; it happened that our Lord God invented the first death.  

On 5 Lamat he established the seven great waters of the sea. 

On 6 Muluc all valleys were submerged, when the world was not yet created. Then 
occurred the invention of the word of our Lord God, when there was no word in heaven, 
when there were neither rocks nor trees. 

Then they went to consider <what they were>, and <the voice> spoke as follows: 
"Thirteen entities, seven entities, one." So it spoke when the word came forth, at the 
time when there was no word. Then the reason was sought by the first ruling day (the 
first day Ahau) why the meaning of the word to them was not revealed so that they 
could declare themselves. Then they went to the center of heaven and joined hands. 
Then the following were set up in the middle of the land: the Burners, four of them: 

4 Chicchan, the Burner. 

4 Oc, the Burner. 

4 Men, the Burner. 

4 Ahau, the Burner. 

These are the four Rulers. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 63

8 Muluc   5 Cauac 

9 Oc   6 Ahau 

10 Chuen 2 7 Imix 

11 Eb   8 Ik 

12 Ben 4 9 Akbal 

13 Ix 5 10 Kan 

1 Men 6 11 Chicchen 

2 Cib   12 Cimi 

3 Caban 7 13 Manik 

4 E¢nab   1 Lamat  

The day-name Oc is a homonym for the word meaning foot. Ix has a slight resemblance 
to the root of nixpahal meaning to tilt. Men means to make or to do something. The 
syllable e¢ of E¢nab means to set something firmly on the ground. Nevertheless the 
Maya were not unaware of the relation between this day and the flint knife pictured by 
its glyph, for in another manuscript we find it associated with a flint, as well as with the 
blood-letter and the warrior, both of whom employed this implement (Kaua, p. 21). 

The association of the day Ahau with hell (metnal) may be because of its resemblance to 
that of Cumhau (or Hun Ahau,) one of the names of the god of the underworld and 
whom the author of the Motul Dictionary identifies as "Lucifer, the prince of the devils." 
Akbal is associated with the verb akzah, which means to water the ground. Chicchan 
resembles chictahal which means to find. The day-name Cimi and the Maya word 
meaning death are homonyms. Muluc resembles the verb mucchahal meaning to be 
buried or submerged.} 

The uinal was created, the earth was created; sky, earth, trees and rocks were set in 
order; all things were created by our Lord God, the Father.  

Thus he was there in his divinity, in the clouds, alone and by his own effort, when he 
created the entire world, when he moved in the heavens in his divinity. Thus he ruled in 
his great power. Every day is set in order according to the count, beginning in the east, 
as it is arranged. 

 

 

 



 64

XIV 
(A HISTORY OF THE SPANISH CONQUEST) 

This is the name of the year when the foreigners arrived, the year One thousand five 
hundred and nineteen. This was the year when the foreigners arrived here at our town, 
<the town> of us, the Itzá, here in the land of Yucalpeten, Yucatan, in the speech of the 
Maya Itzá. 

So said the first Adelantado; Don Juan de Montejo, because he was thus informed by 
Don Lorenso Chable when he listened to this conqueror at Tixkokob. He received the 
foreigners with all his heart. This was the reason they named him Don Lorenso Chable, 
because he gave well-roasted meat to the foreigners and all the captains. He had a son 
also named Don Martin Chable.  

This is the year which was current when the foreigners prepared to seize Yucalpeten 
here. It was known by the priest, the prophet, Ah Xupan, as he was called. Christianity 
was introduced to us in the year 1519. The church at Merida was founded in the year 
1540. In the year 1599 the church at Merida was completed. In the year 1648 yellow 
fever occurred and the sickness  began <to afflict> us.  

There was death by famine for five years, 1650, 1651, 1652, 1653 and 1654. Then the 
famine ended. There was a hurricane which killed Father Agustin Gomes in the year 
1661. There was a drought in the year 1669. <The disease called> uzankak occurred in 
1692. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 65

XV 
(THE PROPHECY OF CHILAM BALAM AND THE STORY OF 

ANTONIO MARTINEZ) 

<Let it be known that the day then arrived> when the tenth katun was established, when 
the katun of the Plumeria flower was established. For three moons had been established 
Yuma-une-tziuit, the quetzal, the green bird.  Then there shall be present the forceful 
one, there would be Nine Mountains, Yuma-une-tziuit, the quetzal, the green bird. No 
one understands the penance among the rulers in the twelfth tun when he declared his 
name. <Like> a jaguar is his head, long is his tooth, withered is his body, <like> a dog 
is his body. His heart is pierced with sorrow. Sweet is his food, sweet is his drink. 
Perchance he does not speak, perchance he will not hear. They say his speech is false 
and mad. Nowhere do the younger sisters, native to the land, surrender themselves. 
They shall be taken away from the land here. So it shall always be with the maidens, the 
daughters whom they shall bear tomorrow and day after tomorrow. Give yourselves up, 
my younger brothers, my older brothers, submit to the unhappy destiny of the katun 
which is to come. If you do not submit, you shall be moved from where your feet are 
rooted. If you do not submit, you shall gnaw the trunks of trees and herbs. If you do not 
submit, it shall be as when the deer die, so that they go forth from your settlement. Then 
<even> when the ruler <himself > goes forth, he shall return within your settlement 
bearing nothing. Also there shall come <such a pestilence that> the vultures enter the 
houses, a time of great death among the wild animals. There shall be three kinds of 
bread, <the bread-nut shall be their bread> in the katun of the Plumeria flower. Then 
<comes the time> when thirteen layers of mats are laid down for the very mad one, for 
the adulterer. Then comes the <papal> bull of six divisions. Three times the bull shall be 
announced. Then the judge of the bull shall come, when he <who bears> the gold staff 
shall judge, when white wax <candles> shall be exchanged.  

It is to be white wax, when justice shall descend from Heaven, for Christian men to 
come up before the eye of justice. Then it shall shake heaven and earth. In sorrow shall 
end the katun of the Plumeria flower. No one shall fulfil his promises. The prop-roots of 
the trees shall be bent over. There shall be an earthquake all over the land. The 
fulfilment of the prophecy of the katun of the Plumeria flower shall be for sale. There is 
no reason or necessity for you to submit to the Archbishop. When he comes, you shall 
go and hide yourselves in the forest. If you surrender yourselves, you shall follow 
Christ, when he shall come. Then his visitation shall end. Then shall come to pass the 
shaking of the Plumeria flower. Then you shall understand. Then it shall thunder from a 
dry sky. Then shall be spoken that which is written on the wall. Then you shall set up 
God, that is, you shall admit his divinity to your hearts. I hardly know what wise man 
among you will understand. He who understands will go into the forest to serve 
Christianity. Who will understand it? 

After only fourteen years of chieftainship, permanently the Son shall arrive, Don 
Antonio Martínez and Saul. These were his names when he departed from heaven. At 
that time he went to Tzimentan, and when he was at Tzimentan a certain queen said she 
would marry him. For seven years he was married, when the golden doors of the house 
of four apartments were opened. <Here>he was shown how, and he equipped a fleet of 
thirteen ships. Then he began a war with the land of Havana. The King had a friend at 
Havana, and the King was advised by his friend. The public prosecutor was there with 
him. Then he went and heard that <the man> was to be seized. Whereupon he departed 



 66

and went to Tzimentan. It was three months after he was seized that the man who took 
him departed. Then he arrived at Tzimentan. When <the man> was seized, he cut short 
the words of him who took him when he arrived at Tzimentan, and he said: "Go, man." 
These were his words to him. "It is three months <since> I arrived," he said. "It is three 
months, now, <since> you departed. It was three months <ago> that you arrived, since 
you arrived, since you are shut up in the prison; in the meantime I come. I will take you 
out of prison. You two captains shall follow me." he said. 

"Let nine chairs be raised up for us to sit on. The sea shall burn. I shall be raised up." 
There was fire in his eye. Sand and spray shall be raised aloft. The face of the sun shall 
be darkened by the great tempest. Whereupon the captain accoutered himself. 
<Everything> shall be blown to the ground by the wind. In the meantime I sit on my 
chair; in the meantime the fleet of thirteen ships comes. Then the King accouters 
himself also. "Prepare yourself, my lord! There come the French." These were his words 
to me. "We shall be killed by <these> men. For what reason does your strength fail 
because of your compatriots? Let me go and direct the ship from the middle." My own 
spirits are raised also. The sea upon which I go burns. The face of the heavens is tilted. 
But when I came down into his presence, the ship was lost. "What man are you?" he 
said to me. "I am without compunction. It is I whom you have aided, I am he whom you 
have caused to live again." <Then he said:> "I shall put my name to the test, it is 
Martinez. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit is my name." <These were 
his words.> Then I brought out the book of seven generations to read. In three months it 
was finished. 

Now the town officials went elsewhere. Whereupon he said he would give his town, 
half of the men <in it>, to me. "Where is your town? It is all my town," <he said>. "You 
shall pay for my town, I was the first to arrive."  

Then, I tell you, justice shall descend to the end that Christianity and salvation may 
arise. Thus shall end the men of the Plumeria flower. Then the rulers of the towns shall 
be asked for their proofs and titles of ownership, if they know of them. Then they shall 
come forth from the forests and from among the rocks and live like men; then towns 
shall be established <again>. There shall be no fox to bite them. This shall be in Katun 9 
Ahau. Five years shall run until the end of my prophecy, and then shall come the time 
for the tribute to come down. Then there shall be an end to the paying for the wars 
which our fathers raised <against the Spaniards>. You shall not call the katun which is 
to come a hostile one, when Jesus Christ, the guardian of our souls, shall come. Just as 
<we are saved> here on earth, so shall he bear our souls to his holy heaven also. You 
are sons of the true God. Amen. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 67

XVI 
(A CHAPTER OF QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS) 

 
FIG. 27--A map of northern Yucatan. (Chumayel MS.). 

13 E¢nab <was the day> when the land was established. 13 Cheneb was when they 
measured off by paces the cathedral, the dark house of instruction, the cathedral in 
heaven. Thus it was also measured off by paces here <on earth>. Thirteen katuns was 
the total count, <that is, thir>teen feet in heaven. Four feet, and from there nine feet, the 
total count of its extent in heaven. Then it is again measured off by feet from the face of 
the earth. Four feet separate it from the face of the earth. 

Mani is the base of the land. Campeche is the tip of the wing of the land. Calkini is the 
base of the wing of the land. Itzmal is the middle of the wing of the land. Zaci is the tip 
of the wing of the land. Conkal is the head of the land.  

In the middle of the town of Tihoo is the cathedral, the fiery house, the mountainous 
house, the dark house, for the benefit of God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy 
Spirit. 

Who enters into the house of God? Father, it is the one named Ix-Kalem.  

What day did the Virgin conceive? Father, 4 Oc <was the day> when she conceived. 

What day did he come forth <from her womb>? On 3 Oc he came forth. 

What day did he die? On 1 Cimi he died. Then he entered the tomb on 1 Cimi. 

What entered his tomb? Father, a coffer of stone entered his tomb. 



 68

What entered in into his thigh? Father, it was the red arrow-stone. It entered into the 
precious stone of the world, there in heaven. 

And his arm? Father, the arrow-stone; and that it might be commemorated, it entered 
into the red living rock in the east. Then it came to the north and entered into the white 
living rock. After that it entered the black living rock in the west. Thus also <it entered> 
the yellow living rock in the south.  

Son, how many deep hollows <are there>? These <are the holes> for playing the flute.  

Son, where is the cenote? All are drenched <with> its water. There is no gravel on its 
bottom; a bow is inserted over its entrance. <It is> the church.Son, where are the first 
marriages? The strength of the King and the strength of the other head-chiefs fail 
because of them, and my strength because of them also. It is bread.  

Son, have you seen the green water-holes in the rock? There are two of them; a cross is 
raised between them. They are a man's eyes. 

Son, where are the first baptised ones? One has no mother, but has a bead collar and 
little bells. It is peeu.  

Son, where is the food which bursts forth, and the fold of the brain <and> the lower end 
of that which is inflated, and the dried fruit? It is the gizzard of a turkey. 

Son bring me that which hooks the sky and the hooked tooth. They are a deer and a 
gopher.  

Son, where is the old woman with buttocks seven palms wide, the woman with a dark 
complexion? It is <the squash called> ¢ol.  

Son, show me the light complexioned woman with her skirt bound up who sells white 
flints. It is <the squash called> ca.  

Son, bring me two yellow animals, one to be well boiled, and one shall have its throat 
cut. I shall drink its blood also. It is a yellow deer and a green calabash full of chocolate. 

<My> sons, bring me here a score of those who bear flat stones and two married ones. 
They are a quail and a dove.  

Son, bring me a cord of three strands, I wish to see it. It is an iguana. 

Son, bring . . . . a mutual confession of sin that I may see it here. It is the maguey.  

Son, bring me here that which stops the hole in the sky and the dew, the nine layers of 
the whole earth. It is a very large maize tortilla.  

Son, have you seen the old man <who is like> an overturned comal? He has a large 
double chin which reaches the ground. It is a turkey cock. 



 69

Son, bring me the old farmers, their beards come to their navels, also their wives. It is a 
muddy arrowroot.  

Bring to me here with them the women who guard the fields, white complexioned 
women. I will remove their skirts and eat them. It is a jícama.   

Son, bring me the great gallants that I may view them. Perhaps they will not dance 
badly when I see them. It is a turkey-cock.Son, where is the first collector? <The answer 
is> to undress, to take off one's shirt, cape, hat and shoes.  

Son, where was it that you passed? Did you pass, perchance, to the high rocky knoll 
which slopes down to the door of heaven, where there is a gate in the wall? Did you see 
men in front of you, coming side by side? Bolon Chaan and the first Ah-kulel are there. 
It is the pupils of the eyes and any pair of eyes. 

Son, have you seen the rain of God? It passed beneath the mountains of God; it entered 
beneath the mountains of God, where there is a cross on the savannah. There will be a 
ring in the sky where the water of God has passed. 

Son, where has the water of God passed when it comes forth from the living rock? 
Father, <from> a man's head and all a man's teeth, it passes through the opening in his 
throat and comes forth beneath. 

Son, whom did you see on the road just now? . . . .  

Son, what did you do with your companions who were coming close behind you? Here 
are my companions. I have not left them. I await the judgment of God when I shall 
come to die. This is a man's shadow. 

Son, whom did you see on the road? Did you see perchance <some> old men 
accompanied by <their> boys? Father, here are the old men I saw on the road. They are 
with me; they do not leave me. This is his great toe with the little <toes>. 

Son, where did you see the old women carrying their step-children and their other boys. 
Father, here they are. They are still with me so that I can eat. I can not leave them yet. It 
is my thumb and the other fingers. 

Son, where did you pass by a water-gutter? Father, here is the water-gutter; it is right 
with me. This is my dorsal furrow. 

Son, where did you see an old man astride a horse across a water-gutter? Father, here is 
the old man. He is still with me. My shoulders are the horse on which you say the old 
man sits astride. 

Son, this is the old man with you of which you spoke: it is manifest truth and justice. 

Son, go get the heart of the stone and the liver of the earth. . . . I have seen one of them 
lying on its back, and one lying on its face as though it were going into hell. They are a 
Mexican Agouti and a Spotted Agouti, also the first local chief and the first Ah-



 70

kulel. As for the heart of the stone, it is the tips of the teeth; and that which covers the 
opening in the neck of hell is a camote and a jícama. 

Son, go and bring me here <the girl> with the watery teeth. Her hair is twisted into a 
tuft; she is a very beautiful maiden. Fragrant shall be her odor when I remove her skirt 
and her <other> garment. It will give me pleasure to see her. Fragrant is her odor and 
her hair is twisted into a tuft. It is an ear of green corn cooked in a pit.  

Son, then you shall go and get an old man and the herb that is by the sea. The old man is 
the ac, and <the herb is> a crab. 

Son, then you shall go and get the stones from the bottom of a forest pond. It is the tzac.  

Son, then you shall bring here the stones of the savannah. It is a quail.  

Also <bring> the first sorcerers, there are four of them. They are the gopher, the Spotted 
Agouti, the Mexican Agouti and the peccary. 

Son, then go and get the thigh of the earth. It is the cassava.  

Son, go and bring here the green gallant and the green singer. It is a wild turkey <hen> 
and cock.  

Son, you shall bring your daughter that I may see her in the sun tomorrow. First the 
smaller one shall be brought and behind her shall come the larger one. Her hair shall be 
bound with a feathered band; she shall wear a head-scarf. I will take off her head-scarf. 
Also the Ah-kulel is behind her.   

Son, then go and get a cluster of Plumeria flowers widely separated. <They should be> 
there where the sun is tomorrow. <What is meant is> roasted corn and honey. 

Here I have rolled that which you have which is flat and round.  There are many rolls of 
it in the cave where you live. Then you shall roll it here that we may see it, when it is 
time to eat. <It is> a fried egg. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 71

XVII 
(AN INCANTATION) 

Strung end to end are the precious stones, the red precious stones, representing the 
substance of heaven, the moisture of heaven.   

The form in which you created the sun, <in which> you created the earth! The form of 
the moisture of heaven, the substance of heaven, the yellow blossom  of heaven! How 
did I create your sun? <How did I> create your moon? How did I create your precious 
stones? I created you. When you were sprinkled with water, you remembered the force 
of the sun. Then when the message was sent to you ... Under cover I created you, I set 
you <where you are>. From time to time I take <you>, I perceive your vigor because of 
your father. You await ... that I may take away ... from your mouth. They are the yellow 
precious stones. So runs its course as he records it. These are the rulers which have been 
set in order. Go and read it and you will understand it.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 72

XVIII 
(A SERIES OF KATUN-PROPHECIES) 

 

FIG. 28. The katun wheel.(Chumayel MS.) 

Katun 11 Ahau is established at Ichcaanzihoo. Yax-haal Chac is its face. The heavenly 
fan, the heavenly bouquet shall descend. The drum and rattle of Ah Bolon-yocte shall 
resound. At that time there shall be the green turkey; at that time there shall be Zulim 
Chan; at that time there shall be Chakanputun. They shall find their food among the 
trees; they shall find their food among the rocks, those who have lost their crops in 
Katun 11 Ahau. 

The katun is established at Uuc-yab-nal in Katun 4 Ahau. At the mouth of the well, 
Uuc-yab-nal, it is established ... It shall dawn in the south. The face of <the lord of the 
katun> is covered; his face is dead. There is mourning for water; there is mourning for 
bread. His mat and his throne shall face the west. Blood-vomit is the charge <of the 
katun>. At that time his loin-cloth and his mantle shall be white. Unattainable shall be 
the bread of the katun. The quetzal shall come; the green bird shall come. The kax tree 



 73

shall come; the bird shall come. The tapir shall come. The tribute shall be hidden at the 
mouth of the well.  

The katun is established at Maylu, Zaci, Mayapan in Katun 2 Ahau. The katun <stone> 
is on its own base. The rope shall descend; the poison of the serpent shall descend, 
pestilence <and> three piles of skulls. The men are of little use. Then the burden was 
bound on Buluc-chabtan. <Then there came up> a dry wind. The ramon is the bread of 
<Katun> 2 Ahau. It shall be half famine and half abundance. This is the charge of Katun 
2 Ahau. 

The Katun is established at Kinchil Coba, Maya Cuzamil, in Katun 13 Ahau. Itzamna, 
Itzam-tzab, is his face during its reign. The ramon shall be eaten. Three years shall be 
locust years, ten generations <of locusts>. The fan shall be displayed; the bouquet shall 
be displayed, borne by Yaxaal Chac in the heavens. Unattainable is the bread of the 
katun in 13 Ahau. The sun shall be eclipsed. Double is the charge of the katun: men 
without offspring, chiefs without successors. For five days the sun shall be eclipsed, 
then it shall be seen <again>. This is the charge of Katun 13 Ahau. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 74

XIX 
(THE FIRST CHRONICLE)  

A record of the count of the katuns since the discovery of Chichen Itzá occurred. It is 
written for the town in order that it may be known by anyone who wishes to be 
informed of the count of the katuns. 

6 Ahau was when the discovery of Chichen Itzá occurred. 

4 Ahau. 

2 Ahau. 

13 Ahau was when the mat <of the katun> was counted in order.  

11 Ahau. 

9 Ahau. 

7 Ahau. 

5 Ahau. 

3 Ahau. 

1 Ahau.  

12 Ahau. 

10 Ahau. 

8 Ahau was when Chichen Itzá was abandoned. There were thirteen folds of katuns 
when they established their houses at Chakanputun.  

6 Ahau. 

4 Ahau was when the land was seized by them at Chakanputun. 

2 Ahau. 

13 Ahau. 

11 Ahau.   

9 Ahau. 

7 Ahau. 

5 Ahau. 



 75

3 Ahau. 

1 Ahau. 

12 Ahau. 

10 Ahau. 

8 Ahau was when Chakanputun was abandoned by the Itzá men. Then they came to 
seek homes again. For thirteen folds of katuns had they dwelt in their houses at 
Chakanputun. This was always the katun when the Itzá went beneath the trees, beneath 
the bushes, beneath the vines, to their misfortune. 

6 Ahau. 

4 Ahau. 

2 Ahau. 

13 Ahau. 

11 Ahau. 

9 Ahau. 

7 Ahau. 

5 Ahau. 

3 Ahau. 

1 Ahau. 

12 Ahau. 

10 Ahau. 

8 Ahau was when the Itzá men again abandoned their homes because of the treachery of 
Hunac Ceel, because of the banquet with the people of Izamal. For thirteen folds of 
katuns they had dwelt there, when they were driven out by Hunac Ceel because of the 
giving of the questionnaire of the Itzá.  

6 Ahau. 

4 Ahau was when the land of Ich-paa Mayapan was seized by the Itzá men who had 
been separated from their homes because of the people of Izamal and because of the 
treachery of Hunac Ceel.   

2 Ahau. 



 76

13 Ahau. 

11 Ahau. 

9 Ahau. 

7 Ahau. 

5 Ahau. 

3 Ahau. 

1 Ahau. 

12 Ahau. 

10 Ahau. 

8 Ahau was when there was fighting with stones at Ich-paa Mayapan because of the 
seizure of the fortress. They broke down the city wall because of the joint government 
in the city of Mayapan.  

6 Ahau. 

4 Ahau was when the pestilence occurred; it was when the vultures entered the houses 
within the fortress.  

2 Ahau was when the eruption of pustules occurred. It was smallpox. 

13 Ahau was when the rain-bringer died. It was the sixth year. The year-count was to 
the east. It was <the year> 4 Kan. Pop was set to the east. . . . It was the <fif>teenth 
<day of the month> Zip. 9 Imix was the day when the rain-bringer, Napot Xiu, died. It 
was the year of our Lord 158.  

11 Ahau was when the mighty men arrived from the East. They were the ones who first 
brought <disease> here to our land, <the land of > us who are Maya, in the year 1513.   

9 Ahau was when Christianity began, when baptism occurred. It was in this katun that 
Bishop Toral arrived here also. It was when the hangings ceased in the year of our Lord 
1546.  

7 Ahau was when Bishop de Landa died.  

5 Ahau. 

3 Ahau. 

 
 
 



 77

XX 
(THE SECOND CHRONICLE)  

4 Ahau was the name of the katun when occurred the birth of Pauahs, when the rulers 
descended.  

Thirteen katuns they reigned; thus they were named while they ruled. 

4 Ahau was the name of the katun when they descended; the great descent and the little 
descent they were called.  

Thirteen katuns they reigned. So they were called. While they were settled, thirteen 
were their settlements.  

4 Ahau was the katun when they sought and discovered Chichen Itzá. There it was that 
miraculous things were performed for them by their lords. Four divisions they were, 
when the four divisions of the nation, as they were called, went forth. From 
Kincolahpeten in the east one division went forth. From Nacocob in the north one 
division came forth. But one division came forth from Holtun Zuyua in the west. One 
division came forth from Four-peaked Mountain, Nine Mountains is the name of the 
land.   

4 Ahau was the katun when the four divisions were called <together>. The four 
divisions of the nation, they were called, when they descended. They became lords 
when they descended upon Chichen Itzá. The Itzá were they then called. 

Thirteen katuns they ruled, and then came the treachery by Hunac Ceel. Their town was 
abandoned and they went into the heart of the forest to Tan-xuluc-mul, as it is called. 

4 Ahau was the katun when their souls cried out! 

Thirteen katuns they ruled in their misery! 

8 Ahau was the katun when occurred the arrival of the remainder of the Itzá, as they 
were called. They arrived, and there their reign endured in Chakanputun. 

13 Ahau was the katun when they founded the town of Mayapan, the Maya men, as they 
were called. 

8 Ahau was when their town was abandoned and they were scattered throughout the 
entire district. In the sixth katun after they were dispersed, then they ceased to be called 
Maya.  

11 Ahau was the name of the katun when the Maya men ceased to be called Maya. They 
were called Christians; their entire province <became subject> to St. Peter and the 
reigning King <of Spain>. 

 
 
 



 78

XXI 
(THE THIRD CHRONICLE)  

A record of the katuns for the Itzá, called the Maya katuns. 

12 Ahau. 

10 Ahau. 

8 Ahau. 

6 Ahau was when the people of Conil were dispersed.  

4 Ahau. 

2 Ahau.   

13 Ahau. 

11 Ahau. 

9 Ahau. 

7 Ahau. 

5 Ahau was when the town of the ruler of Izamal, Kinich Kakmoo as well as Pop-hol 
Chan was destroyed by Hunac Ceel. 

3 Ahau. 

1 Ahau was when the remainder of the Itzá were driven out of Chichen. It was the third 
tun of <Katun> 1 Ahau when Chichen was depopulated. 

12 Ahau. 

10 Ahau. 

8 Ahau was the katun when the remainder of the Itzá founded their town, coming forth 
from beneath the trees and bushes at Tan-Xuluc-Mul, as it was called. They came out 
and established the land of Zaclactun Mayapan, as it was called. In the seventh tun of 
Katun 8 Ahau, this was the katun when Chakanputun perished at the hands of Kak-u-
pacal and Tee Uilu.  

6 Ahau. 

4 Ahau. 

2 Ahau. 

13 Ahau. 



 79

11 Ahau. 

9 Ahau. 

7 Ahau. 

5 Ahau was when foreigners arrived to eat men.   

They were called foreigners without skirts. The land was not depopulated by them. 

3 Ahau. 

1 Ahau was when the district of Tancah Mayapan, as it was called, was depopulated. It 
was in the first tun of Katun I Ahau that the head-chief Tutul <Xiu> departed with the 
chiefs of the town and the four divisions of the town. This was the katun when the men 
of Tancah were dispersed and the chiefs of the town were scattered. 

12 Ahau. The stone was taken at Otzmal. 

10 Ahau. The stone was taken at Zizal. 

8 Ahau. The stone was taken at Kancaba. 

6 Ahau. The stone was taken at Hunacthi. 

4 Ahau. The stone was taken at Atikuh. This was the katun when the pestilence 
occurred. It was in the fifth tun of Katun 4 Ahau.  

2 Ahau. The stone was taken at Chacalna. 

13 Ahau. The stone was taken at Euan. 

11 Ahau. On the first day the stone was taken at Colox-peten.   

This was the katun when the rain-bringer died; his name was Napot Xiu. It was in the 
first tun of 11 Ahau, that was the katun, when the 

Spaniards first arrived here in our land. It was in the seventh tun of Katun 11 Ahau that 
Christianity then began; it was in the year A. D. 15 19.  

9 Ahau. No stone was taken. This was the katun when Bishop Francisco Toral first 
arrived. He arrived in the sixth tun of Katun 9 Ahau.  

7 Ahau. No stone was taken. This was the katun when Bishop de Landa died. Then 
another bishop also arrived.   

5 Ahau. 

3 Ahau. 



 80

On this 18th day of August, 1766, occurred a hurricane. I have made a record of it in 
order that it may be seen how many years it will be before another one will occur. 

On this 20th day of January, 1782, there was an epidemic of inflammation here in the 
town of Chumayel. The swelling began at the neck and then descended. <It spread> 
from the little ones to the adults, until it swept the entire house, once it was introduced. 
The remedy was sour ashes and lemons or the young Siempre vive. It was the year of '81 
when it began. After that there was a great drought also. There was scarcely any rain. 
The entire forest was burned <with the heat>, and the forest <trees> died This is the 
record which I have written down, I, Don Juan Josef Hoil. (Rubrica.)   

Chumayel, June 28th, 1858, was when I made a loan to Chinuh Balam. 1, Pedro 
Briceño. (Rubrica.)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 81

XXII 
(A BOOK OF KATUN-PROPHECIES) 

 
(1. Frontispiece.) 

 
 

FIG. 29--The lords of the thirteen katuns. (Chumayel MS.). 

We have here a picture of the thirteen Lords of the Katuns.The blurred faces may 
signify that they are blindfolded. The crowns, crosses and manner of drawing are 
purely European, but they doubtless represent the idols set up in honor of each katun. 
Unfortunately no pre-Conquest representation of these figures has come down to us. Cf. 
Landa 1929, PP. 94-Too, also Appendix D. After thirteen Katuns the same series will 
always recur. 



 82

Today, Wednesday, April 4th, 1832, I have recorded the name of Maria Isidora, 
daughter of Andres Balam and Maria Juana Xicum 

Today, Sunday, December 22d, 1833, I have recorded the name of Tomas, son of 
Andres Balam and Maria Xicum. God-father: José Maria Castañeda. God-mother: 
Manuela Marin. 

Cura 

. . . Justo Balam, Secretary. (Rubrica) 

This is the day on which I purchased the book: July 1st, 1838. It cost me one peso in 
<my> poverty. This was the price <I paid> to the Señor Padre: <one> peso. This is the 
year of the purchase ... I have recorded it in order that it might be known that at this 
time it passed into my hands by purchase. 

I, Pedro de Alcantara Briceño, resident of San Antonio.   

(2. Historical introduction to the katun-prophecies.) 

In Katun 13 Ahau the ship of the foreigners first appeared at Campeche. 1541 was the 
name of the year when they brought the news that the Maya men were to enter into 
Christianity, when the land of Tantun Cuzamil was established. They were there for half 
a year. Then they went to the seaport to the west and the people of Chikin-Chel were put 
under tribute. It was the year 1542 when the district of Tihoo, Ichcanziho, was 
established, in Katun 11 Ahau. The first governor was the Adelantado Don Francisco 
Montejo who was to appoint subjects for the foreigners, mighty men. In the year 1542 
tribute was introduced. A. D. 1545 was the year when the Padres arrived, four years 
after the arrival of the foreigners. Then it was that men were baptised from town to town 
by <the Padres>. When they first arrived the towns were distributed among them. 

1544 was the year . . . six hundred years and seventy-five years after the town of 
Chichen Itzá was depopulated, after its settlements were depopulated. <It was> eight 
hundred years and seventy years after the town of Uxmal was depopulated, after the 
people were driven out of its towns.  

In the year 1537, on a day named 9 Cauac, was when the nobles gathered at the town of 
Mani to discuss fully whether they should go and bring the foreigners to their 
settlements because the head-chief had been killed. These were their names: Ah 
Moochan Xiu, Nahau Ez, Ah ¢un Chinab, Napoot Cupul, Napot Che, Nabatun Itza, Ah-
kin Euan from Caucel, Nachan Uc from ¢ibilkal Ah-kin Ucan from Ekob, Nachi Uc, 
Ah-kul Koh, Nachan Motul, Nahau Coyi. These were the men of importance who talked 
of bringing the foreigners to their town, because the head-chief of the town, Ah <¢un> 
Xiu was killed at Otzmal.   

10 Kan was the year-bearer when the seeker for a town passed. He was called Montejo, 
he who wrote down the towns. This was the year when the strangers in the land, the 
foreigners who ate annonas, passed. They were the first to distribute the towns. It was 
when the foreigners arrived that the "receivers" received them. When they assembled at 
Campeche, when their ships came forth, then the nobles went to give gifts to them. 



 83

There were thirteen "receivers of the foreigners." After that they came to Ichcanziho. 9 
Ahau was the katun.  

<This is> a record of the wisdom of the book in which is set down the course of the 
katun. Here it is published in the land of Nitun¢ala, Chactemal, Tahuaymil, Holtun Itzá, 
Chichinila, in order that the charge of the course of the katun may be known, of each 
katun, whether it is good or bad. Thus it is written by the Holy Writer, the Evangelist, it 
is the word of the Lord of heaven and earth . . . it comes from on high. This was given 
to them ... at the beginning of the land, at the beginning of our humanity ... the true 
word in Holy Writ, in the book, the Reportorio. It has no error; the seal on the book was 
carefully surveyed by them. These were the four lineages from heaven, the substance of 
heaven, the moisture of heaven, the head-chiefs, the rulers of the land: Zacaal Puc, 
Hooltun Balam, Hochtun Poot, Ah Mex-Cue Chan.  

Behold, within seven score years Christianity will be introduced amid the clamor of the 
rulers, those who violently seize land <during> the katun. Then suddenly appears the 
wise man; then there is the examination of the katun. Miserable is the face of Chac 
Chuen Coyi. Then the Lord of the Church shall come. It is in the middle of the town of 
Tihoo. It shall come from the East, from the North, from the West, from the South; the 
word of Christianity shall be heard in the 17th tun in order that Christianity may truly 
arise.   

The Padres shall arrive; the Bishop shall arrive, the Holy Inquisition, the word of God. 
<These things> shall be accomplished. No one shall cause them to cease. Amen. 

(3. The katun-prophecies.)  

The Chapter of the year, the katun. 

First: 11 Ahau, when the foreigners first established the country. 

The first: Katun 11 Ahau was the beginning of the katun-count, the first katun. The 
katun was established at Ichcaanzihoo when the foreigners arrived. Red were the beards 
of the children of the sun, the bearded ones from the east, when they arrived here in our 
land. The strangers to the land are white men, red men, . . . a beginning of carnal sin . . . 
Oh Itzá! . . . make ready. There cometh a white circle in the sky, the fair-skinned boy 
from 



 84

 

FIG. 30--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.). 

Each prophecy of this series is headed by an illustration similar to this one. It consists 
of a crowned head, and the crown is surmounted by a cross. It evidently represents a 
so-called "ruler" mentioned in a number of the prophecies, but there is some 
uncertainty as to the function of his personage in connection with each new katun. In 
the Tizimin (p. 22) and Mani (Code. Perez, p. 120) manuscripts we read of a certain 
Katun 8 Ahau that "the ruler of the people of Uxmal was painted." It is possible that this 
means that a picture of this ruler headed the prophecy for the katun: but Katun 8 Ahau 
"was established" at Izamal and not Uxmal according to the present series of katun-
prophecies.  

heaven, the white wooden standard that shall descend from heaven. A quarter of a 
league, a league away, it approaches. You shall see the dawn of a new day, you shall see 
the mut-bird. Oh! how there shall be intercession for us when they come. There shall 
come multitudes who gather stone and wood,  the worthless rabble of the town. Fire 
shall flame up at the tips of their hands. There shall be sufficient poison and also ropes 
to hang their lords. Oh Itzá! Your worship is of no avail with the true God who has 
descended. It is false in word and teaching. Niggard is the katun; scanty are its rains. 
Who would be the priest, who would be the prophet who would understand it when he 
came to Tancah Mayapan <or> to Chichen Itzá? Alas! The <burden> laid upon the 
younger brothers; it came in Katun 7 Ahau through necessity, through misery, from the 
tribute, from the time it was first imposed upon you down to the tribute which you shall 
bear tomorrow and day after tomorrow in your children's time. Prepare yourselves to 
endure the burden of misery which is to come among your villages. This katun which 
has been established is, a katun of misery, a katun of the importunity of the devil, when 
it is established in Katun 11 Ahau. Receive your guests, the bearded men, the bearers of 
the sign of God. Your elder brothers, the men of Tantun, come. They shall ask of you an 
offering to God with them. Their priest was named Ah Miznilacpe. Their faces were 
<like> the puma, <like> Antichrist, on that day which is to come, on that day which 
confronts you, alas, in much misery, <my> sons. This is the word of our Lord: "It shall 
burn on earth, there shall be a white circle in the sky, in that katun in time to come." It is 
the true word from the mouth of God the Father. Alas, very heavy is the burden of the 
katun that shall be established in Christianity. When it comes there shall be slavish talk, 



 85

slavish ... servile men. When it comes, there shall be . . . you shall see. There shall come 
the head-chiefs ... the two day occupants of the thrones and mats ... in the <five> 
unlucky days at the end of the year, in the days of penance. This only is the end of the 
word of God. 11 is the cup <of the katun>. The news <regarding> the aspect of its reign 
is gathered, all its teachings, all its words. You shall die; you shall live; but you may not 
understand the word of the living book. Ah Maypan was his only son, his justice. He 
was put in prison, he was taken out, then he was bound and whipped. After that, when 
he was seated, the son was admonished. There was a hat on his head and sandals on his 
feet. A cord was tied about his waist when he came.  

The second <katun>. 

Katun 9 Ahau is the second katun of the count. The katun was established at 
Ichcaanzihoo. Then it was that the foreigners to the land received their tribute. Then it 
was that the fathers of our souls arrived. The scattered  

 

FIG. 31--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.). 

divisions of the towns under their local chieftains were gathered together. They began to 
teach the holy faith and baptise us. The foundations of the holy Cathedral were laid, the 
public house of God, the widely extended house of God the Father. Then the seven 
sacraments were established to take away <our sins> . . . There began to be much labor 
in the center of the town . . . the misery of the world. Then there was set up . . . the word 
of God, which shall also come from the mouth of God the Father. Then the fair 
complexioned boy arrives, he comes from heaven. The Virgin, as she is called, is the 
mother of the seven planets.  

 
FIG. 32--The seven planets. (Chumayel MS.). 

It was in the ninth year of <Katun> 9 Ahau that they served Christianity, just as it was 
written by the prophet Chilam Balam on the stone of nine seals in heaven. 13 E¢nab 
was the day there in heaven as well as here on earth. <There was> the heavenly staff, 



 86

the heavenly fan. The cord descended, the word of God which came from on high all 
over the entire world. Nine was its plate, nine was its cup. Oh make ready, Itzá. 
Nowhere shall you offer <provocation> to your guests. You shall give them food to eat, 
and they shall also give you food to 
eat when they come.   

The third <katun>. 

Katun 7 Ahau is the third katun. 
The katun is established at 
Ichcaanzihoo. Yaxal Chac is the 
face <of the katun in the heavens> 
to its ruler, to its wise man, while 
the drum <resounds> below and 
the rattle <resounds> above. The 
Plumeria is its bread, the Plumeria 
is its water, the burden <of the 
katun>. Then begins the lewdness 
of the wise men, the beckoning of 
carnal sin, the beckoning of the 
katun. The katun begins to limp; it 
is all over the world. <Carnal sin> 
is its garment, carnal sin is its face, 
carnal sin is its ... carnal sin is its 
sandal, carnal sin is its head, carnal 
sin is its gait. They twist their necks, they twist their mouths, they wink the eye, they 
slaver at the mouth, at men, women, chiefs, justices, presiding officers, clerks, choir-
masters, <everybody both> great and small. There is no great teaching. Heaven and 
earth are truly lost to them; they have lost all shame. Then the head-chiefs of the towns, 
the rulers of the towns, the prophets of the towns, the priests of the Maya men are 
hanged. Understanding is lost; wisdom is lost. Prepare yourselves, oh Itzá! Your sons 
shall see the mirth of the katun, the jesting of the katun. Dissolute is the speech, 
dissolute the face of the rogue to the rulers, to the head-chiefs. Seven is the plate, seven 
the cup <of the katun>, it is the word of God. Much hanging <of men> is the charge of 
the katun.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
FIG. 33--The lord of the katun.  

(Chumayel MS.) 



 87

The fourth <katun>. 

Katun 5 Ahau is the fourth katun. The 
katun is established at Ichcaanzihoo. 
Harsh is its face, harsh its tidings, to 
the ruler. There is affliction of the 
offspring of woman and man, when it 
comes. Then begins the vexation by 
the devil in the world. Then <came> 
the blinding of <the face of the god>, 
the face of Kauil, in the four changing 
heavens, the four changing roads. Then 
hanging comes to the world. The red 
<rattlesnake> raises its head to bite; 

the holil-<och> raises its head <to bite>. Men and women have few children. Then 
came ... the end of the cigar, after the lord of the world was created ... he heard the 
dance...  There is the red flowered thing, the red xulab, the red uayah-cab, the accessory 
of the rattle of the giver of our hearts in tribute through misery and vexation. It is the 
opossum chieftain, the fox chieftain, the ah-pic chieftain, the <blood->sucking 
chieftain, the avaricious ones of the town. He is set up perchance, and then it is that your 
drum is beaten, my younger brother <my> elder brother. He who lies in wait for you on 
all fours is among you, the tolil-och. <It is> his katun. The Plumeria flower is his chair, 
as he sits on his throne. He is publicly seen in the market-place on his mat, the two-day 
occupant of the throne, the two-day occupant of the mat.  

They deceive the town, the two town 
officials, the chieftain opossum and he 
who lies in wait on all fours. They 
bring the pestilence, <they are> the 
cause of ...; there was little of it 
formerly. You then called them the 
Itzá. The rattle of the katun is shaken; 
there is the treachery of the katun at 
Tancah Mayapan. There is the great 
tribute of Zuyua. The kinkajou claws 
the back of the jaguar amid the 
affliction of the katun, amid the 
affliction of the year; they are greedy 
for dominion. Many hangings are the 
charge of the katun, when the chiefs of 
the town are hung there. There is an 
end to the misery of the Maya men 
when suddenly the men of Uaymil 
come to take vengeance on the world.  

 

 

 
FIG. 34--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.) 

 
FIG. 35--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel M.S.) 



 88

The fifth katun. 1620. 

Katun 3 Ahau was the fifth katun. The katun was established at Ichcaanzihoo. Ek-
Cocah-mut was its face to the rulers, to the wise men. Antichrist was its face to the 
rulers. Fire shall flame up at the horn of the brockett at Ichcaanzihoo. The skin of the 
jaguar shall be spread out in the marketplace. The water-tank is its tidings. There are 
rains of little profit, rains from a rabbit sky, rains from a parched sky, rains from a 
woodpecker sky, high rains, rains from a vulture sky, crested rains, deer rains. Then 
descends the thrice raised leaf of the zil-palm. There is fighting; there is a year of 
locusts. The diminished remainder <of the population> is hanged. They are defeated in 
war. Sad shall be the havoc at the cross-roads. There are the lords of the army; their 
souls cry out at the opening up of the town ...  

Behold, I am Katun 3 Ahau. My town of Ichcaanzihoo is founded. Behold, I am Caesar 
Augustus. . . . I receive my donation in the heart of the forest  

The first <katun>.  

Katun I Ahau is the seventh katun. The 
katun is established at Emal. At that 
time Ix Puc-yola and Ox Ualacii shall 
come. The rope shall descend, the 
cord  shall descend. There comes from 
heaven the word of the true path. 
Through it will come the fulfilment of 
the word of the Lord of heaven, the 
true word. 

 

The dog is its tidings; the vulture is its tidings. The flag is the second of the figures 
<drawn above>. The opossum is its face to the rulers. Thrice impeded are their thought 
and speech, thrice impeded their manhood, thrice impeded their flint knife among the 
rulers, among the wise men. Then came Hunpic-ti-ax as an affliction, the jaguar and 
Canul for an affliction. These were the eaters of their food, the destroyers of their crops, 
the boboch the destroyer of food. For seven years there is the affliction of Hunpic-ti-ax; 
for seven years there is the affliction of Canul. Then the justice of our Lord, God, shall 
descend upon carnal sin, upon the worthless rabble of the town, upon the lewd rogue, 
the rascal. After that there shall come another word, another teaching, but the Maya men 
shall not admit it to their hearts. The word of God, the Father of Heaven, shall be sung 
among them that they may correct their ways, that they may turn their backs upon their 
evil ways, the usages among Maya men; but they will not wish to listen to the word of 
God, when they should rather respect the judges as their fathers. The hearts of the head-
chiefs of the world shall be sad. They believe little, nor do they even believe that. So 
you say. The blessed among those in authority are set apart. Fire shall be kindled with a 
fire-drill as a sign of the Maya Virgin. Hunab-ku is in his only virgin Church, where he 
cries out. There is heard the word of the Lord of Heaven, the Lord on earth. The entire 
world shall be sad when he comes. The wing of the land shall shake, the center of the 
land shall shake when he comes in his time. Then there shall occur the obedience of the 

 
FIG. 36--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.) 



 89

foreigners of Bentana <to> the word of God. Thrice shall the justice of our Lord 
descend to the world. Then a great army shall descend upon the worthless rabble of the 
town, that it may be known whether their faith is truly firm. Then descended the 
governor. There shall begin the tearing out of the eyes: of the rogue who incites riot, of 
the great rascal, of the great hawk of the town, of the fox of the town. Then the eternal 
ruler shall come to cut the cord from the burden of misery, the ruler who appraises. 
Then sickness, the result of guilt, shall descend, the punishment of all the world shall 
come from heaven, with it the drought. At that time it shall be all over the world. The 
remainder of the guardians of the sands, the guardians of the sea, shall be detained 
together such as the people of Uaymil, such as the people of Emal. The rest of them 
shall be assembled in great numbers by the sea at the end of the katun. Thus it is seen 
that the fold of the katun is brought about. Then the flag shall be raised. Then there is an 
end to the importunity of the devil, of Antichrist. <There is> knife-thrusting strife, 
purse-snatching strife, strife with the blow-gun, strife by trampling on people, 
stonethrowing strife. The fighting ends in the heart of the forest where Cæsar Augustus 
receives his donation. <There is> sudden death with hunger; the vultures enter, the 
houses <because> of the pestilence. There is sad havoc with flies <swarming> at the 
cross-roads, and at the four resting places <at the four corners>. There is oppression of 
the younger brothers, flaying of the sons; it comes to the world. Then arrives the ruler to 
propound the riddle to them. His face is that of a war-captain, of the son of God. After 
that there is the arrival of the Bishop, the Holy Inquisition as it is called, and Saul. They 
ask for penitence and Christianity. There is an end to greed, an end to vexation in the 
world. This shall be the end of its prophecy: there is a great war. The Chan<s> shall rise 
up in war with the five divisions of Chakan, an army of Chan<s> in Katun I Ahau. A 
parching whirlwind storm is the charge of the katun. There is a series of rains, rain from 
a rabbit-sky <during> the evil katun. There is a sudden end to planting. Then the burden 
of legal summons descends; tribute descends; the proof is sought, with seven fathoms . . 
., when the serving of God is strongly urged. It is the end of receiving the money of 
Antichrist. Antichrist does not come, our Lord God does not desire it. The katun is not 
ruined here in our land by the natives of our land. This was the origin of Antichrist, it 
was avarice; but before the coming of the mighty men there was no robbery by violence, 
there was no greed and striking down one's fellow man in his blood, at the cost of the 
poor man, at the expense of the food of each and every one. In time to come there shall 
be five fruits of the tree for the food of the kinkajou, the man of Bentena. Alas, there is 
sorrow in the heart of the Lord of Heaven. Smallpox is the end of the prophecy of the 
katun. An army shall come forth from Havana <with> a fleet of thirteen ships.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 90

The second <katun>. 

 
FIG. 37--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.) 

Katun 12 Ahau is the eighth katun of the count. The katun is established at 
Zaclahtun. Yaxal Chuen is his face, Buleu-caan-chac is his face to the rulers. He shall 
manifest himself. He is in the sky by day; he is in the sky by night. The great artisan, the 
wise man <shall come>. There are kind head-chiefs, kind chiefs; kindness and joy is the 
law of the entire world. Poor men become rich. Abundance of bread is the word of the 
katun. It is a rich year; there is an accumulation of wealth also. The katun is good. The 
rains are good ones; the fruit will form. Then they come forth from among the rocks to 
Christianity, where God is. There shall be neither the fox nor the kinkajou that will 
bite. Then penitence is sought of the town officials, <with the opening of> the golden 
gates and the town marriages in the official building.  
 

Then our sandals are sought for, in the 
time of our Christianity. This is a new day 
which dawns for us; this is what you tell of 
today. This shall be the end of the katun of 
carnal sin. Soon shall it end. The law of 
the ruler comes. Then there shall come the 
Seven Mountains, the Red Star, and in the 
wind-swollen sky <there shall be> the 
House of Storms, in the 17th tun.   

 

 

 

 

 

 
FIG. 38--The lord of the katun. 

 (Chumayel MS.) 



 91

The third <katun>. 

Katun 10 Ahau, the katun is established at Chable. The ladder is set up over the rulers of 
the land. The hoof shall burn; the sand by the seashore shall burn; the bird's nest shall 
burn. The rocks shall crack <with the heat>; drought is the charge of the katun. It is the 
word of our Lord God the Father and of the Mistress of Heaven, the portent of the 
katun. No one shall arrest the word of our Lord God, God the Son, the Lord of Heaven 
and earth. There shall not be lacking that which shall, through his power, come to pass 
all over the world. Holy Christianity shall come bringing with it the time when the 
stupid ones who speak our language badly shall turn from their evil ways. No one shall 
prevent it; this then is the drought. Sufficient is the word for the Maya priests, the word 
of God. 

8 Ahau is the <next> fold, the fourth <katun>.   

The fourth <katun>. 

Katun 8 Ahau is the ninth katun. The 
katun is established at Izamal. There is 
Kinich Kakmo. The shield shall 
descend, the arrow shall descend 
<upon Chakanputun> together with 
the rulers of the land. The heads of the 
foreigners to the land were cemented 
<into the wall> at Chakanputun. There 
is an end of greed; there is an end to 
causing vexation in the world. It is the 
word of God the Father. Much 
fighting shall be done by the natives of 
the land. 

The fifth <katun>. 

Katun 6 Ahau is the tenth katun according to the count. The katun is established at 
Uxmal. <The katun monuments> are set up on their own bases. Shameless is his speech, 
shameless his face  to the rulers. They shall be the inventors of lewd speech, and then 
God the Father shall descend to cut their throats because of their sins. Then they shall be 
regenerated; the judgment of our Lord God shall unite them until they enter into 
Christianity with their families. As many as are born here on earth shall enter into 
Christianity. 

 
FIG. 39--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.). 



 92

 

The first <katun>. 

Katun 4 Ahau is the eleventh katun according 
to the count. The katun is established at 
Chichen Itzá. The settlement of the Itzá shall 
take place <there>. The quetzal shall come, the 
green bird shall come. Ah Kantenal shall come. 
Blood-vomit shall come. Kukulcan  shall come 
with them for the second time. <It is> the word 
of God. The Itzá shall come. 

 

 

 

The second <katun>. 

Katun 2 Ahau is the twelfth katun. At Maya [uaz] 
Cuzamil the katun is established. For half <the 
katun> there will be bread; for half <the katun> 
there will be water. <It is> the word of God. For 
half of it there will be a temple for the rulers. <It 
is> the end of the word of God.   

 

 

 
FIG. 40--The lord of the katun. (Chumayel MS.) 

 
FIG. 41--The lord of the katun. 

 (Chumayel MS.) 

 
FIG. 42--The lord of the katun.  

(Chumayel MS.) 



 93

The third <katun>. 

The judgment.  

It is Katun 13 Ahau according to the count. The 
katun is established at Kinchil Coba, the 
thirteenth katun. The bouquet of the rulers of 
the world shall be displayed. There is the 
universal judgment of our Lord God. Blood 
shall descend from the tree and stone. Heaven 
and earth shall burn. It is the word of God the 
Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. It 
is the holy judgment, the holy judgment of our 
Lord God. There shall be no strength in heaven 

and earth. Great cities shall enter into Christianity, any settlements of people whatever, 
the great towns, whatever their names are as well as the little towns, all over our land of 
Maya Cuzamil Mayapan. <It shall be> for our two-day men, because of lewdness . . . 
the sons of malevolence. At the end of our blindness and shame our sons shall be 
regenerated from carnal sin. There is no lucky day for us. It is the cause of death from 
bad blood, when the moon rises, when the moon sets, the entire moon, <this was> its 
power; <it was> all blood. So it was with the good planets <which were> looked upon 
as good. It is the end of the word of God. The waters of baptism shall come over them, 
the Holy Spirit. They receive the holy oil without compulsion; it comes from God. 
There are too many Christians who go to those who deny the holy faith, . . .  <to> the 
Itzá and the balams. There is then an end to our losing. . . 

(Page 101 is left blank in the Chilam Balam of Chumayel. It contains a note in a 
modern hand stating that a page of the book is missing here.)   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
FIG. 43--The lord of the katun.  

(Chumayel MS.) 



 94

XXIII 
(THE LAST JUDGMENT)  

The judgment of God for the righteous: "Come unto me ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the eternal glory prepared by my Father for you since the beginning of the world. You 
have kept my commandments; you have done penance when you sinned against me. 
Therefore come ye to heaven." Then he turns his gaze upon the sinners with whom he is 
angered. "Depart from me ye accursed of my Father into the eternal fire of hell which is 
prepared for the Devil by my Father. You have despised me, your Father, me, your 
Redeemer. You have despised my commandments with the commandment of the Devil. 
Go ye therefore with him to eternal misery." Then the wicked men shall go to hell, but 
the good men shall go to Heaven with our Father, God, to eternal glory comparable to 
the glory of Jehoshaphat. There are three men, the true servants of God, well beloved of 
God. Elias, and Methuselah and Enoch are their names; they are living to this day. They 
are ordained by God to guard his seats. Our Lord God shall call a reckoning in a valley 
in the land, a great open savannah. There he shall sit upon his throne. The entire world 
shall assemble <there>. The sheep shall be set apart; they shall be on his right hand. The 
goats shall be set apart; they shall be on his left hand. On his left shall be the wicked 
men; those who have not fulfilled all the commandments of God shall then go to the 
eternal misery of hell, sunk in the earth, oppressed by <the Sins> of our first parents. 
But the good men who have fulfilled the commandments of God shall be at the right 
hand of the great Lord God. "Come, ye men blessed of my Father and take the kingdom 
prepared for you since the beginning of the world." Then a great cloud shall gather, 
black in the sky, down to the face of the earth. Like a trumpet is the joyful song of the 
Angels. It is beautiful beyond comparison. The true God shall arise, the Lord of heaven 
and earth. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 95

XXIV 
(PROPHECIES OF A NEW RELIGION)  

These are the words which were composed to admonish the fatherless ones, the 
motherless ones. These words are to be treasured as a precious jewel is treasured. They 
are concerning the coming introduction of Christianity, <and were spoken> at Tancah 
Mayapan <and> at Chichen Itzá in the time of the Zuyua people, in the time of the Itzá. 
A new wisdom shall dawn upon the world universally, in the east, north, west and 
south. It shall come from the mouth of God the Father. Those who recorded it were the 
five priests, the holy priests who came into the presence of God. They recorded the 
charge of misfortune when the introduction of Christianity came. 

Here are their names written down: 

1. Chilam Balam, the great priest. 
2. Napuctun, the great priest. 
3. Nahau Pech, the great priest. 
4. Ah Kuil Chel, the great priest. 
5. Natzin Yabun Chan, the great priest. 

<Like> a servant of God who bends his back over virgin soil, they recorded the charge 
of misery in the presence of our Lord God: the introduction of Christianity occurs; 
blood-vomit, pestilence, drought, a year of locusts, smallpox are the charge of misery, 
<also> the importunity of the devil. There shall be a white circle in the sky. It shall burn 
on earth in Katun 3 Ahau, in Katun 1 Ahau, the worst of three katuns. Just as it was 
written by the Evangelists and the prophet Balam, it came from the mouth of the Lord 
of heaven and earth. Then the priests set it down in holy writ at the time of the great 
drought at Lahun Chable in <the time of> Christianity. Then Saul and Don Antonio 
Martínez shall come to avenge their descendants. The day has dawned. So it is written 
in the command of the great priest, the prophet of Chilam Balam and in the chest of 
manuscripts. Amen Jesus. 

The Interpretation <of> the histories of Yucatan. 

The priests, the prophecy <of> Napuctun.  

It shall burn on earth; there shall be a circle in the sky. Kauil shall be set up; he shall be 
set up in front in time to come. It shall burn on earth; the <very> hoof shall burn in that 
katun, in the time which is to come. Fortunate is he who shall see it when the prophecy 
is declared, who shall weep over his misfortunes in time to come.  

The prophecy of Ah Kuil Chel, the priest. 

When the end of the katun shall come, lord, ye shall not understand when it comes. 
Who shall believe it at the rolling up of the mat of the katun? The end shall come 
because of misery. It comes from the north, it comes from the west at that time when it 
shall be, lord. Who then shall be the priest, who then <shall be> the prophet who will 
declare truly the word of the book, lord, in <Katun> 9 Ahau? Ye shall not understand, 
<ye people> in every part of the world . . . shall be cleansed of shame. Oh <there was> 



 96

joy among the rulers, pleasure among the rulers of the land. Acknowledge it in your 
hearts, ye Itzá.  

The prophecy of Nahau Pech the great priest. 

At that time when the sun shall stand high <in the heavens>, lord, when the ruler has 
had compassion, in the fourth katun it shall come to pass, the tidings of God are truly 
brought. They ask perchance what I recommend, lord. You see your guests upon the 
road, oh Itzá! It is the fathers of the land who will arrive. <This prophecy> comes from 
the mouth of Nahau Pech, the priest in the time of Katun 4 Ahau at the end of the 
katun, lord. 

The food of the ant<-like> men shall be destroyed. They shall be at the end of their food 
<-supply> because of the boboch <which takes their> food, the great hawk <which 
takes their> food, the ant, the cowbird, the grackle, the blackbird, the mouse.   

The prophecy of Natzin Yabun Chan. 

There was the word of the true God in the land. You shall await the coming forth, lord, 
of his priests who will bring it in time to come. Give your understanding to his word, to 
his admonition. Fortunate are you who truly receive it. Forsake those things which you 
have held sacred, oh Itzá; forget your perishable gods, your transitory gods. Of all 
things he is the ruler, lord, the creator of all heaven and earth. It is to your hearts that I 
speak, oh Maya Itzá. You shall not desire another God <than> the true God according to 
your <own> words. You shall take to heart the word of my admonition.  

The prophecy of Chilam Balam, the singer, of Cabal-chen, Mani. 

On <the day> 13 Ahau the katun will end in the time of the Itzá, in the time of Tancah 
<Mayapan>, lord. There is the sign of Hunab-ku on high. The raised wooden standard 
shall come. It shall be displayed to the world, that the world may be enlightened, lord. 
There has been a beginning of strife, there has been a beginning of rivalry, when the 
priestly man shall come to bring the sign <of God> in time to come, lord. A quarter of a 
league, a league <away> he comes. You see the mut-bird surmounting the raised 
wooden standard. A new day shall dawn in the north, in the west. 

Itzamná Kauil shall rise. Our lord comes, Itzá. Our elder brother comes, <oh> men of 
Tantun. Receive your guests, the bearded men, the men of the east, the bearers of the 
sign of God, lord. Good indeed is the word of God that comes to us. The day of our 
regeneration comes. You do not fear the world, Lord, you are the only God who created 
us. It is sufficient, then, that the word of God is good, lord. <He is> the guardian of our 
souls. He who receives him, who has truly believed, he will go to heaven with him. 
Nevertheless <at> the beginning were the two-day men. 

Let us exalt his sign on high, let us exalt it <that we may gaze upon it today> with the 
raised standard. Great is the discord that arises today. The First Tree of the World is 
restored; it is displayed to the world. This is the sign of Hunab-ku on high. Worship it, 
Itzá. You shall worship today his sign on high. You shall worship it furthermore with 
true good will, and you shall worship the true God today, lord. You shall be converted 
to the word of Hunab-ku, lord; it came from heaven. Oh it is he who speaks to you! Be 



 97

admonished indeed, Itzá. They will correct their ways who receive him in their hearts in 
another katun, lord. 

Believe in my word itself, I am Chilam Balam, and I have interpreted the entire message 
of the true God <of> the world; it is heard in every part of the world, lord, the word of 
God, the Lord of heaven and earth. Very good indeed is his word in heaven, lord. 

He is ruler over us; he is the true God over our souls.   

But those to whom <the word> is brought, lord: thrice weighed down is their strength, 
the younger brothers native to the land. Their hearts are submerged <in sin>. Their 
hearts are dead in their carnal sins. They are frequent backsliders, the principal ones 
who spread <sin>, Nacxit Xuchit in the carnal sin of his companions, the two-day 
rulers. <They sit> crookedly on their thrones; crookedly in carnal sin. Two-day men 
they call them. For two days <endure> their seats, their cups, their hats. They are the 
unrestrained lewd ones of the day, the unrestrained lewd ones of the night, the rogues of 
the world. They twist their necks, they wink their eyes, they slaver at the mouth, at the 
rulers of the land, lord. Behold, when they come, there is no truth in the words of the 
foreigners to the land. They tell very solemn and mysterious things, the sons of the men 
of Seven-deserted-buildings, the offspring of the women of Seven-deserted-buildings, 
lord. 

Who will be the prophet, who will be the priest who shall interpret truly the word of the 
book? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 98

APPENDIX A 
THE FOUR WORLD-QUARTERS 

Few religious ideas were more widely spread among the aboriginal peoples of America 
than that of the sacred character of the four cardinal points. The Plains Indians of North 
America are said to ascribe the origin of this conception to the apparent motions of the 
sun to the east, north, west and south, and the same explanation would appear to hold 
good for the peoples of Central America. The Maya connected the idea with a system of 
color symbolism: red with the east, white with the north, black with the west and yellow 
with the south. In the Dresden Codex we frequently find the glyphs for these directions 
associated with those representing the four colors in the order named. Each successive 
year followed the same rotation according to the day with which it began. The Kan 
years were ascribed to the east, the Muluc years to the north, the Ix years to the west and 
the Cauac years to the south, as shown by the calendar wheel of the Book of Chilam 
Balam of Ixil. The same system governed the katun-wheel, only here we find whole 
groups of katuns associated with each of the cardinal points, as we see from the wheel 
on page of the present work. On pages 41 and 42 of the Maya Codex Cortesianus there 
is a picture of the four world-quarters, each marked with its appropriate glyph, and in 
the Mexican Codex Fejérváry-Mayer is a similar picture showing the trees and birds 
mentioned in Chapter X of the Chumayel. It is evident that the Mexican and Maya 
myths relating to this subject were very similar in some respects. 

In Chapter X we have seen how the gods set up the four Trees of Abundance at the 
cardinal points to commemorate the previous destruction of the world. Like the 
conventionalized trees of the Palenque reliefs, the so-called crosses, these trees were 
surmounted by birds of mythological significance. From the four world-quarters came 
the winds, and here in all probability were the four great jars of water which supplied 
the rains. According to the Mexican version of this myth the rain was favorable or 
unfavorable to the crops depending on the cardinal point from which it came.   

From Landa we learn that "among the multitude of gods worshipped by these people 
they adored four, each of whom was called Bacab. These, they said, were four brothers 
whom God, when he created the world, placed at its four quarters to hold up the sky, so 
that it should not f all. They also state that these Bacabs were saved when the world was 
destroyed by a deluge. Other names are <also> given to each of these, and with them 
they designate the world quarter where God set them to hold up the sky." The same 
writer goes on to tell us their names. In the east was Chacal Bacab, literally the Red 
Bacab, whose name was Cantzicnal, and Landa also ascribes to him the names Chac 
Pauahtun and Chac-xib-chac. In the north was Zac-cimi, as Zacal Bacab, or the White 
Bacab, was named, and he is also called Zac Pauahtun and Zac-xib-chac. In the west 
was Hozan-ek, or Ekel Bacab, the Black Bacab, also called Ek Pauahtun and Ek-xib-
chac. In the south was Hobnil, or Kanal Bacab, the Yellow Bacab, to whom Landa also 
gives the names, Kan Pauahtun and Kan-xib-chac. Connected with the worship of these 
Bacabs were four stones, the Red, White, Black and Yellow Acantuns, which were 
anointed with the blood of the worshippers. Acantun might be translated as stone stela, 
and each of these probably had its mythological counterpart at one of the four cardinal 
points.  

In the Motul Dictionary the word bacab is defined as "representante," possibly 
indicating that the Bacabs were the representatives of the gods. They were the advocates 



 99

or patrons of the bee-keepers, and it has been thought that their name was in some way 
connected with bees or honey, as cab can mean honey and bee-hive as well as earth and 
land. In the ritual in Chapter I we have noted that there were red, white, black and 
yellow bees, each sort ascribed to the world-quarter corresponding to their color. Of the 
individual names of the Bacabs, Cantzicnal and Hozan-ek mean little to the writer. Zac-
cimi means a swoon, and Hobnil, which primarily means something hollow, is a term 
applied to a bee-hive, probably because it is made of the hollow section of a tree-trunk. 

It seems likely that the four Pauahtuns were not quite the same as the Bacabs. Brinton 
gives an account of the misa milpera, or cornfield mass, as described by Baeza in a 
report written in 1813. Here it is stated that "they are identical with the winds, and the 
four cardinal points from which they blow," and we find this confirmed in Chapter XI 
of the Chumayel which contains the Ritual of the Angels. In the modern ceremonies the 
red, white and black wind-spirits are identified with St. Dominic, St. Gabriel, and St. 
James; only the Yellow Pauahtun has the name of a Maya deity. This is Ix-Kan-le-ox, 
the goddess named for the yellow ramon leaf. The word, Pauahtun, is difficult to 
translate. The last two syllables, Uah and tun, suggest a stone or a pillar set up or 
erected; but they are evidently personages, and the writer is inclined to identify them 
with the "angels" described by Landa in his account of the ceremonies preceding the 
New Year. We have already seen in Chapter XI that the four Pauahtuns were set up 
before the world was created and were either identical or closely associated with the 
wind-spirits. Possibly they occupied the same position in the heavens that the Bacabs 
did on the earthly plane. 

Landa has also ascribed to the four Bacabs the names, Chac-xib-chac, Zac-xib-chac, Ek-
xib-chac and Kan-xib-chac. These appear to be the rain-gods who were four in number 
and were set at the four cardinal points. The author of the Motul Dictionary considers 
them to be one person and states that Chaac "was a gigantic man who taught agriculture 
and whom they later considered the god of bread, water, thunder and lightning." The 
names given by Landa could be translated as the Red, White, Black and Yellow male 
Chacs, or rain-gods. 

We find in Landa a detailed description of the ceremonies performed on the five 
unlucky days which concluded the year. Although they have been considered New 
Year's ceremonies, in each case the Bacabs and other personages belong to the year 
which is ending, and not to the coming year for which they are said to be the augury. On 
pages 25 to 28 of the Dresden Codex is the portrayal of some very similar ceremonies 
which Seler has analysed and compared with the Landa account.  

 

 

 

 

 

 



 100

APPENDIX B 
THE SACRIFICIAL CENOTE AT CHICHEN ITZA 

Chichen Itzá was at one time not only the greatest and most powerful city in Yucatan, 
but it was a sacred city as well, a center of pilgrimage to which people flocked from 
every part of the peninsula and from foreign countries also to make offerings of gold, 
incense, copper, precious stones and human victims. The city owed its reputation for 
sanctity to its cenote, or natural well, which was believed to be inhabited by the gods 
and the spirits of the illustrious dead. It is a great cup-shaped depression in the earth 
with perpendicular walls, about seventy feet down to the surface of the water and about 
one hundred and seventy feet across. The sacred well served no utilitarian purpose; the 
city obtained its water from another more convenient cenote and several artificial wells. 

We first hear of the Sacrificial Cenote from Bishop Landa who mentions it several times 
in his report on the natives of Yucatan. He gives an account of human sacrifice and 
adds: "Besides killing people in their towns, they had two infamous sanctuaries at 
Chichen Itzá and Cozumel, where they sent an infinite number of wretched people to be 
sacrificed. At the former they were flung headlong down a precipice, and at the latter 
they tore out their hearts." "From the court facing these theaters (two stone platforms in 
front of the main temple) a broad and handsome causeway led to a well about twice a 
stone's throw distant. Into this well it was their custom to cast living men as a sacrifice 
to the Gods in times of drought; and it was their belief that they did not die, although 
they never saw them any more. They also threw in many other things of precious stone 
and articles which they highly prized. Thus if this land had contained gold, this well 
would hold the largest part of it, so devoted were the Indians to it. It is a well with a 
depth of seven times a man's height down to the water and a breadth of more than one 
hundred feet. It is round with a sheer precipice down to the water which is 
extraordinary. The water appears to be very green, and I believe that this is caused by 
the thicket of trees with which it is surrounded. It is also very deep. Above, close to its 
mouth, is a small structure where I found idols made in honor of all the principal 
edifices of the country, almost like the Pantheon at Rome. I do not know whether this 
was a device of the ancients or of the moderns in order to encounter their idols when 
they came to this well with offerings. I found pumas carved in the round, (stone) jars 
and other things such that I do not know how anyone can say that these people did not 
have steel tools. I also found two men of great stature each carved from a single block 
of stone, naked but their modesty preserved by the coverings the Indians formerly used. 
They had separate heads with ear-rings in the ears such as the Indians used to wear. 
There was a tenon at the back of the neck which fitted into a deep hole made for it 
which was also in the neck. When fitted together it made a complete figure." Landa also 
tells us "that they held Cozumel and the well at Chichen Itzá in as great veneration as 
we do the pilgrimages to Jerusalem and Rome."  

A report by the municipality of Valladolid written in 1579 covers a number of details 
omitted by Landa. Here we read: "This pyramid (the principal temple of the city) lies 
between two cenotes of very deep water. One of these is called the Sacrificial Cenote. 
Chichen Itzá was named for an Indian who lived beside the Sacrificial Cenote and who 
was called Ah Kin Itzá. It was the custom of the lords and nobles of all these provinces 
of Valladolid to fast for sixty days without raising their eyes during this time even to 
look at their wives or those who brought them their food. And this they did in order, 
when they should arrive at the mouth of that cenote, to cast into it at break of day some 



 101

Indian women of each of these lords. They had told them that they should ask for an 
abundant year <and> all those things which occurred to them. Thus when these Indian 
women were thrown in without being bound but flung down as from a cliff, they fell 
into the water striking it with great force. Precisely at mid-day the one who was to come 
forth made a great outcry for them to let down a rope to draw her out. When she came 
up half dead, they built large fires about her perfuming her with copal incense. After she 
recovered consciousness, she said that down below there were many of her nation, both 
men and women, and that they received her; but when she raised her head to look at any 
of them, they struck her with heavy blows on the back of the neck so that she should 
keep her head bowed. This was all within the water, below which there were believed to 
be many hollows and pits. And they replied to her whether there would be an abundant 
year or a bad one according to the questions which the Indian woman asked of them. 
And if the devil was angered with any of the lords who threw in the Indian women, 
when none asked to be drawn out at precisely noon, they knew that he was angry with 
them and that she would never more come forth. In this it rather resembles what 
occurred at the cave of Salamanca. Then when it was seen that she was not coming out, 
that lord and all of his <men> threw great stones into the water and fled precipitately 
from the place making a great outcry."  

We have seen in the Chumayel, however, that one man at least did not flee in terror 
from the cenote when none of the messengers to the gods returned. This was Hunac 
Ceel, later the head-chief of Mayapan who conquered Chichen Itzá and drove out its 
inhabitants. He was evidently of the stuff of which rulers are made, a man with 
sufficient courage and force of character to shape his own destiny. When no one 
appeared on the surface of the water crying to be drawn out, he realized that the 
prophecy must be obtained at any cost. "It was Cauich, Hunac Ceel, Cauich, was the 
name of the man there who put out his head over the mouth of the well on the south 
side. Then he went to get it. Then he came forth to declare the prophecy." There can be 
but one interpretation of this terse statement: Hunac Ceel cast himself into the cenote 
and returned from its depths bringing the desired prophecy. 

In his account of the visit of Father Alonso Ponce to Yucatan in the summer of 1588, 
Antonio de Ciudad Real, the reputed author of the Motul Dictionary, tells of the 
Sacrificial Cenote at Chichen Itzá and adds the detail that "they even say that in the wall 
of this well or zonote there is a cave which enters a considerable distance within <the 
cliff>." In his description of the ruins of Mayapan the same writer describes the 
principal pyramid and states: "Near the foot of this mul (pyramid) there is a very deep 
zonote with a very flat stone at the edge of its mouth from which (as they say) they 
flung down those whom they sacrificed to their gods." Stephens found a cenote at 
Mayapan near the base of one of the larger pyramids there but states that it was in a 
cave. "The entrance was by a broken, yawning mouth, steep, and requiring some care in 
the descent."  

Long after Chichen Itzá ceased to be of political importance, its sacred cenote continued 
to draw pilgrims. The last pilgrimage of which we have any knowledge was in 1536, 
and although its members never reached the holy spot, the event had considerable 
influence on the history of the country. "The Spaniards having gone forth from Yucatan 
(1535), there was a scarcity of water in the land, and as they had used their maize 
recklessly in the wars with the Spaniards, there came upon them a great hunger, so great 
that they were even brought to eat the bark of trees, especially one which they called 



 102

cumche, which is soft and tender inside. On account of this famine the Xiu who are 
Lords of Mani resolved to make a solemn sacrifice to the idols, bearing certain slaves, 
both men and maidens, to be thrown into the well of Chichen Itzá, and to reach which 
they have to pass by the town of the Lords Cocomes, their principal enemies, and so 
thinking that at such a time ancient passions would not be renewed in this land, they 
(the Xiu) sent to them (the Cocom) asking them to let them (the Xiu) pass through their 
land. And the Cocomes deceived them with a fair reply, and giving them shelter all 
together in one great house they set fire to it and slew those who escaped, and for this 
reason there were great wars." Here we have the complete story of the murder of Napot 
Xiu mentioned on pages138, 142 and 146 of the present work. From this it would 
appear that the rain-god was one of the divinities who dwelt in the Sacrificial Cenote. 

In a report written in 1581 by one of the early Spanish settlers who tells us that he 
received much of his information from Gaspar Antonio Chi, we read: "At one time all 
this land was under the dominion of a lord who dwelt at the ancient city of Chichen Itzá 
and to whom all the lords of this province were tributaries. And even from without the 
province, from Mexico, Guatemala, Chiapas and other provinces they sent them 
presents in token of peace and friendship." 3 We can not but believe that these foreign 
embassies, which must have traveled for weeks through tropical forests, swamps and 
waterless wastes to reach a far-off city in northeastern Yucatan, were motivated more by 
the religious veneration which its famous sanctuary enjoyed than by the political 
prestige which its rulers enjoyed in such a distant country. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




