






































1.	Ch’ien	/	The	Creative

The	first	hexagram	is	made	up	of	six	unbroken	lines.	These	unbroken	lines	stand	for	the	primal	power,
which	is	lightgiving,	active,	strong,	and	of	the	spirit.	The	hexagram	is	consistently	strong	in	character,	and
since	it	is	without	weakness,	its	essence	is	power	or	energy.	Its	image	is	heaven.	Its	energy	is	represented
as	unrestricted	by	any	fixed	conditions	in	space	and	is	therefore	conceived	of	as	motion.	Time	is	regarded
as	the	basis	of	this	motion.	Thus	the	hexagram	includes	also	the	power	of	time	and	the	power	of	persisting
in	time,	that	is,	duration.
The	power	represented	by	the	hexagram	is	to	be	interpreted	in	a	dual	sense—in	terms	of	its	action	on

the	universe	and	of	its	action	on	the	world	of	men.	In	relation	to	the	universe,	the	hexagram	expresses	the
strong,	creative	action	of	the	Deity.	In	relation	to	the	human	world,	it	denotes	the	creative	action	of	the
holy	man	or	sage,	of	the	ruler	or	leader	of	men,	who	through	his	power	awakens	and	develops	their	higher
nature.1

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CREATIVE	works	sublime	success,
Furthering2	through	perseverance.

According	to	the	original	meaning,	the	attributes	[sublimity,	potentiality	of	success,	power	to	further,
perseverance]	are	paired.	When	an	individual	draws	this	oracle,	 it	means	that	success	will	come	to	him
from	the	primal	depths	of	the	universe	and	that	everything	depends	upon	his	seeking	his	happiness	and
that	of	others	in	one	way	only,	that	is,	by	perseverance	in	what	is	right.
The	specific	meanings	of	 the	 four	attributes	became	the	subject	of	speculation	at	an	early	date.	The

Chinese	word	here	rendered	by	“sublime”	means	literally	“head,”	“origin,”	“great.”	This	is	why	Confucius
says	in	explaining	it:	“Great	indeed	is	the	generating	power	of	the	Creative;	all	beings	owe	their	beginning
to	it.	This	power	permeates	all	heaven.”3	For	this	attribute	inheres	in	the	other	three	as	well.
The	beginning	of	all	things	lies	still	in	the	beyond	in	the	form	of	ideas	that	have	yet	to	become	real.	But

the	Creative	 furthermore	has	power	 to	 lend	 form	 to	 these	archetypes	of	 ideas.	This	 is	 indicated	 in	 the
word	 success,	 and	 the	process	 is	 represented	by	an	 image	 from	nature:	 “The	clouds	pass	and	 the	 rain
does	its	work,	and	all	individual	beings	flow	into	their	forms.”4
Applied	to	the	human	world,	these	attributes	show	the	great	man	the	way	to	notable	success:	“Because

he	 sees	with	great	 clarity	 causes	 and	 effects,	 he	 completes	 the	 six	 steps	 at	 the	 right	 time	and	mounts
toward	heaven	on	them	at	the	right	time,	as	though	on	six	dragons.”	The	six	steps	are	the	six	different
positions	given	in	the	hexagram,	which	are	represented	later	by	the	dragon	symbol.	Here	it	is	shown	that
the	way	to	success	lies	in	apprehending	and	giving	actuality	to	the	way	of	the	universe	[tao],	which,	as	a
law	 running	 through	 end	 and	 beginning,	 brings	 about	 all	 phenomena	 in	 time.	 Thus	 each	 step	 attained
forthwith	becomes	a	preparation	 for	 the	next.	 Time	 is	 no	 longer	 a	hindrance	but	 the	means	of	making
actual	what	is	potential.
The	act	of	creation	having	 found	expression	 in	 the	two	attributes	sublimity	and	success,	 the	work	of

conservation	is	shown	to	be	a	continuous	actualization	and	differentiation	of	form.	This	is	expressed	in	the
two	 terms	 “furthering”	 (literally,	 “creating	 that	 which	 accords	 with	 the	 nature	 of	 a	 given	 being”)	 and
“persevering”	 (literally,	 “correct	 and	 firm”).	 “The	 course	 of	 the	Creative	 alters	 and	 shapes	beings	until
each	attains	its	true,	specific	nature,	then	it	keeps	them	in	conformity	with	the	Great	Harmony.	Thus	does
it	show	itself	to	further	through	perseverance.”
In	relation	to	the	human	sphere,	this	shows	how	the	great	man	brings	peace	and	security	to	the	world

through	his	activity	 in	creating	order:	“He	towers	high	above	the	multitude	of	beings,	and	all	 lands	are
united	in	peace.”
Another	 line	 of	 speculation	 goes	 still	 further	 in	 separating	 the	 words	 “sublime,”	 “success,”

“furthering,”	“perseverance,”	and	parallels	them	with	the	four	cardinal	virtues	in	humanity.	To	sublimity,
which,	 as	 the	 fundamental	 principle,	 embraces	 all	 the	 other	 attributes,	 it	 links	 love.	 To	 the	 attribute
success	 are	 linked	 the	mores,5	which	 regulate	 and	 organize	 the	 expressions	 of	 love	 and	 thereby	make
them	successful.	The	attribute	furthering	is	correlated	with	justice,	which	creates	the	conditions	in	which
each	 receives	 that	 which	 accords	 with	 his	 being,	 that	 which	 is	 due	 him	 and	 which	 constitutes	 his
happiness.	The	attribute	perseverance	is	correlated	with	wisdom,	which	discerns	the	immutable	laws	of
all	that	happens	and	can	therefore	bring	about	enduring	conditions.	These	speculations,	already	broached
in	the	commentary	called	Wên	Yen,6]	later	formed	the	bridge	connecting	the	philosophy	of	the	“five	stages
(elements)	of	change,”	as	laid	down	in	the	Book	of	History	(Shu	Ching)	with	the	philosophy	of	the	Book	of
Changes,	which	is	based	solely	on	the	polarity	of	positive	and	negative	principles.	In	the	course	of	time
this	 combination	 of	 the	 two	 systems	 of	 thought	 opened	 the	 way	 for	 an	 increasingly	 intricate	 number
symbolism.7

THE	IMAGE
The	movement	of	heaven	is	full	of	power.
Thus	the	superior	man	makes	himself	strong	and	untiring.

Since	 there	 is	 only	 one	 heaven,	 the	 doubling	 of	 the	 trigram	 Ch’ien,	 of	 which	 heaven	 is	 the	 image,
indicates	the	movement	of	heaven.	One	complete	revolution	of	heaven	makes	a	day,	and	the	repetition	of
the	trigram	means	that	each	day	is	followed	by	another.	This	creates	the	idea	of	time.	Since	it	is	the	same



heaven	moving	with	untiring	power,	there	is	also	created	the	idea	of	duration	both	in	and	beyond	time,	a
movement	 that	 never	 stops	 nor	 slackens,	 just	 as	 one	 day	 follows	 another	 in	 an	 unending	 course.	 This
duration	in	time	is	the	image	of	the	power	inherent	in	the	Creative.
With	 this	 image	 as	 a	model,	 the	 sage	 learns	 how	 best	 to	 develop	 himself	 so	 that	 his	 influence	may

endure.	He	must	make	 himself	 strong	 in	 every	way,	 by	 consciously	 casting	 out	 all	 that	 is	 inferior	 and
degrading.	 Thus	 he	 attains	 that	 tirelessness	 which	 depends	 upon	 consciously	 limiting	 the	 fields	 of	 his
activity.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning8	means:
Hidden	dragon.	Do	not	act.

In	China	the	dragon	has	a	meaning	altogether	different	from	that	given	it	 in	the	Western	world.	The
dragon	 is	 a	 symbol	 of	 the	 electrically	 charged,	 dynamic,	 arousing	 force	 that	 manifests	 itself	 in	 the
thunderstorm.	 In	 winter	 this	 energy	 withdraws	 into	 the	 earth;	 in	 the	 early	 summer	 it	 becomes	 active
again,	appearing	in	the	sky	as	thunder	and	lightning.	As	a	result	the	creative	forces	on	earth	begin	to	stir
again.
Here	this	creative	force	is	still	hidden	beneath	the	earth	and	therefore	has	no	effect.	In	terms	of	human

affairs,	this	symbolizes	a	great	man	who	is	still	unrecognized.	Nonetheless	he	remains	true	to	himself.	He
does	not	allow	himself	 to	be	 influenced	by	outward	success	or	 failure,	but	confident	 in	his	strength,	he
bides	his	time.	Hence	it	is	wise	for	the	man	who	consults	the	oracle	and	draws	this	line	to	wait	in	the	calm
strength	of	patience.	The	time	will	fulfill	itself.	One	need	not	fear	lest	strong	will	should	not	prevail;	the
main	 thing	 is	 not	 to	 expend	 one’s	 powers	 prematurely	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 obtain	 by	 force	 something	 for
which	the	time	is	not	yet	ripe.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.

Here	the	effects	of	the	light-giving	power	begin	to	manifest	themselves.	In	terms	of	human	affairs,	this
means	 that	 the	 great	 man	 makes	 his	 appearance	 in	 his	 chosen	 field	 of	 activity.	 As	 yet	 he	 has	 no
commanding	position	but	 is	still	with	his	peers.	However,	what	distinguishes	him	from	the	others	 is	his
seriousness	of	purpose,	his	unqualified	reliability,	and	the	influence	he	exerts	on	his	environment	without
conscious	effort.	Such	a	man	is	destined	to	gain	great	influence	and	to	set	the	world	in	order.	Therefore	it
is	favorable	to	see	him.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
All	day	long	the	superior	man	is	creatively	active.
At	nightfall	his	mind	is	still	beset	with	cares.
Danger.	No	blame.

A	sphere	of	influence	opens	up	for	the	great	man.	His	fame	begins	to	spread.	The	masses	flock	to	him.
His	inner	power	is	adequate	to	the	increased	outer	activity.9	There	are	all	sorts	of	things	to	be	done,	and
when	others	are	at	rest	in	the	evening,	plans	and	anxieties	press	in	upon	him.	But	danger	lurks	here	at
the	 place	 of	 transition	 from	 lowliness	 to	 the	 heights.	Many	 a	 great	man	 has	 been	 ruined	 because	 the
masses	 flocked	 to	him	and	swept	him	 into	 their	 course.	Ambition	has	destroyed	his	 integrity.	However,
true	greatness	 is	not	 impaired	by	temptations.	He	who	remains	 in	 touch	with	 the	time	that	 is	dawning,
and	with	its	demands,	is	prudent	enough	to	avoid	all	pitfalls,	and	remains	blameless.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Wavering	flight	over	the	depths.
No	blame.

A	place	of	transition	has	been	reached,	and	free	choice	can	enter	in.	A	twofold	possibility	is	presented
to	the	great	man:	he	can	soar	to	the	heights	and	play	an	important	part	in	the	world,	or	he	can	withdraw
into	 solitude	 and	 develop	 himself.	 He	 can	 go	 the	 way	 of	 the	 hero	 or	 that	 of	 the	 holy	 sage	 who	 seeks
seclusion.	There	is	no	general	law	to	say	which	of	the	two	is	the	right	way.	Each	one	in	this	situation	must
make	a	free	choice	according	to	the	inner	law	of	his	being.	If	the	individual	acts	consistently	and	is	true	to
himself,	he	will	find	the	way	that	is	appropriate	for	him.	This	way	is	right	for	him	and	without	blame.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place10	means:
Flying	dragon	in	the	heavens.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.

Here	the	great	man	has	attained	the	sphere	of	the	heavenly	beings.	His	influence	spreads	and	becomes
visible	 throughout	 the	whole	world.	Everyone	who	sees	him	may	count	himself	blessed.	Confucius	 says
about	this	line:
“Things	that	accord	in	tone	vibrate	together.	Things	that	have	affinity	in	their	inmost	natures	seek	one

another.	Water	 flows	 to	what	 is	wet,	 fire	 turns	 to	what	 is	dry.	Clouds	 (the	breath	of	heaven)	 follow	 the
dragon,	wind	 (the	breath	of	 earth)	 follows	 the	 tiger.	Thus	 the	 sage	arises,	 and	all	 creatures	 follow	him
with	their	eyes.	What	is	born	of	heaven	feels	related	to	what	is	above.	What	is	born	of	earth	feels	related
to	what	is	below.	Each	follows	its	kind.”

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.

When	a	man	seeks	to	climb	so	high	that	he	loses	touch	with	the	rest	of	mankind,	he	becomes	isolated,
and	this	necessarily	leads	to	failure.	This	line	warns	against	titanic	aspirations	that	exceed	one’s	power.	A
precipitous	fall	would	follow.

When	all	the	lines	are	nines,	it	means:
There	appears	a	flight	of	dragons	without	heads.



Good	fortune.
When	 all	 the	 lines	 are	 nines,	 it	 means	 that	 the	 whole	 hexagram	 is	 in	motion	 and	 changes	 into	 the

hexagram	 K’un,	 THE	 RECEPTIVE,	 whose	 character	 is	 devotion.	 The	 strength	 of	 the	 Creative	 and	 the
mildness	of	the	Receptive	unite.	Strength	is	indicated	by	the	flight	of	dragons,	mildness	by	the	fact	that
their	 heads	 are	 hidden.	 This	means	 that	mildness	 in	 action	 joined	 to	 strength	 of	 decision	 brings	 good
fortune.



2.	K’un	/	The	Receptive

This	hexagram	is	made	up	of	broken	lines	only.	The	broken	line	represents	the	dark,	yielding,	receptive
primal	power	of	 yin.	The	attribute	of	 the	hexagram	 is	devotion;	 its	 image	 is	 the	earth.	 It	 is	 the	perfect
complement	of	THE	CREATIVE—the	complement,	not	 the	opposite,1	 for	 the	Receptive	does	not	combat
the	Creative	but	completes	it.	It	represents	nature	in	contrast	to	spirit,	earth	in	contrast	to	heaven,	space
as	against	time,	the	female-maternal	as	against	the	male-paternal.	However,	as	applied	to	human	affairs,
the	 principle	 of	 this	 complementary	 relationship	 is	 found	 not	 only	 in	 the	 relation	 between	 man	 and
woman,	but	also	 in	 that	between	prince	and	minister	and	between	 father	and	 son.	 Indeed,	even	 in	 the
individual	this	duality	appears	in	the	coexistence	of	the	spiritual	world	and	the	world	of	the	senses.
But	 strictly	 speaking	 there	 is	 no	 real	 dualism	 here,	 because	 there	 is	 a	 clearly	 defined	 hierarchic

relationship	 between	 the	 two	 principles.	 In	 itself	 of	 course	 the	 Receptive	 is	 just	 as	 important	 as	 the
Creative,	but	the	attribute	of	devotion	defines	the	place	occupied	by	this	primal	power	in	relation	to	the
Creative.	For	the	Receptive	must	be	activated	and	led	by	the	Creative;	then	it	is	productive	of	good.	Only
when	 it	 abandons	 this	 position	 and	 tries	 to	 stand	 as	 an	 equal	 side	 by	 side	 with	 the	 Creative,	 does	 it
become	evil.	The	result	then	is	opposition	to	and	struggle	against	the	Creative,	which	is	productive	of	evil
to	both.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	RECEPTIVE	brings	about	sublime	success,
Furthering	through	the	perseverance	of	a	mare.
If	the	superior	man	undertakes	something	and	tries	to	lead,
He	goes	astray;
But	if	he	follows,	he	finds	guidance.
It	is	favorable	to	find	friends	in	the	west	and	south,
To	forego	friends	in	the	east	and	north.
Quiet	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

The	four	fundamental	aspects	of	the	Creative—“sublime	success,	 furthering	through	perseverance”—
are	also	attributed	to	the	Receptive.	Here,	however,	the	perseverance	is	more	closely	defined:	it	is	that	of
a	mare.	The	Receptive	connotes	spatial	reality	in	contrast	to	the	spiritual	potentiality	of	the	Creative.	The
potential	becomes	real	and	the	spiritual	becomes	spatial	through	a	specifically	qualifying	definition.	Thus
the	qualification,	“of	a	mare,”	is	here	added	to	the	idea	of	perseverance.	The	horse	belongs	to	earth	just
as	 the	 dragon	 belongs	 to	 heaven.	 Its	 tireless	 roaming	 over	 the	 plains	 is	 taken	 as	 a	 symbol	 of	 the	 vast
expanse	of	the	earth.	This	is	the	symbol	chosen	because	the	mare	combines	the	strength	and	swiftness	of
the	horse	with	the	gentleness	and	devotion	of	the	cow.
Only	because	nature	in	its	myriad	forms	corresponds	with	the	myriad	impulses	of	the	Creative	can	it

make	these	impulses	real.	Nature’s	richness	lies	in	its	power	to	nourish	all	living	things;	its	greatness	lies
in	its	power	to	give	them	beauty	and	splendor.	Thus	it	prospers	all	that	lives.	It	is	the	Creative	that	begets
things,	 but	 they	 are	 brought	 to	 birth	 by	 the	 Receptive.	 Applied	 to	 human	 affairs,	 therefore,	 what	 the
hexagram	 indicates	 is	 action	 in	 conformity	 with	 the	 situation.	 The	 person	 in	 question	 is	 not	 in	 an
independent	position,	but	is	acting	as	an	assistant.	This	means	that	he	must	achieve	something.	It	is	not
his	task	to	try	to	lead-that	would	only	make	him	lose	the	way-but	to	let	himself	be	led.	If	he	knows	how	to
meet	 fate	with	 an	 attitude	 of	 acceptance,	 he	 is	 sure	 to	 find	 the	 right	 guidance.	 The	 superior	man	 lets
himself	be	guided;	he	does	not	go	ahead	blindly,	but	learns	from	the	situation	what	is	demanded	of	him
and	then	follows	this	intimation	from	fate.
Since	there	is	something	to	be	accomplished,	we	need	friends	and	helpers	in	the	hour	of	toil	and	effort,

once	the	 ideas	to	be	realized	are	firmly	set.	The	time	of	toil	and	effort	 is	 indicated	by	the	west	and	the
south,	for	west	and	south	symbolize	the	place	where	the	Receptive	works	for	the	Creative,	as	nature	does
in	 summer	 and	 autumn.	 If	 in	 that	 situation	 one	 does	 not	 mobilize	 all	 one’s	 powers,	 the	 work	 to	 be
accomplished	will	not	be	done.	Hence	to	find	friends	there	means	to	find	guidance.	But	in	addition	to	the
time	of	toil	and	effort,	there	is	also	a	time	of	planning,	and	for	this	we	need	solitude.	The	east	symbolizes
the	place	where	a	man	receives	orders	from	his	master,	and	the	north	the	place	where	he	reports	on	what
he	 has	 done.	 At	 that	 time	 he	 must	 be	 alone	 and	 objective.	 In	 this	 sacred	 hour	 he	 must	 do	 without
companions,	so	that	the	purity	of	the	moment	may	not	be	spoiled	by	factional	hates	and	favoritism.

THE	IMAGE
The	earth’s	condition	is	receptive	devotion.
Thus	the	superior	man	who	has	breadth	of	character
Carries	the	outer	world.

Just	as	there	is	only	one	heaven,	so	too	there	is	only	one	earth.	In	the	hexagram	of	heaven	the	doubling
of	the	trigram	implies	duration	in	time,	but	 in	the	hexagram	of	earth	the	doubling	connotes	the	solidity
and	extension	in	space	by	virtue	of	which	the	earth	is	able	to	carry	and	preserve	all	things	that	live	and
move	upon	it.	The	earth	in	 its	devotion	carries	all	things,	good	and	evil,	without	exception.	In	the	same
way	the	superior	man	gives	to	his	character	breadth,	purity,	and	sustaining	power,	so	that	he	is	able	both
to	support	and	to	bear	with	people	and	things.

THE	LINES



Six	at	the	beginning	means:
When	there	is	hoarfrost	underfoot,
Solid	ice	is	not	far	off.

Just	as	the	light-giving	power	represents	life,	so	the	dark	power,	the	shadowy,	represents	death.	When
the	 first	 hoarfrost	 comes	 in	 the	 autumn,	 the	 power	 of	 darkness	 and	 cold	 is	 just	 at	 its	 beginning.	After
these	 first	warnings,	signs	of	death	will	gradually	multiply,	until,	 in	obedience	to	 immutable	 laws,	stark
winter	with	its	ice	is	here.
In	 life	 it	 is	 the	 same.	 After	 certain	 scarcely	 noticeable	 signs	 of	 decay	 have	 appeared,	 they	 go	 on

increasing	until	final	dissolution	comes.	But	in	life	precautions	can	be	taken	by	heeding	the	first	signs	of
decay	and	checking	them	in	time.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Straight,	square,	great.
Without	purpose,
Yet	nothing	remains	unfurthered.

The	symbol	of	heaven	is	the	circle,	and	that	of	earth	is	the	square.	Thus	squareness	is	a	primary	quality
of	the	earth.	On	the	other	hand,	movement	in	a	straight	line,	as	well	as	magnitude,	is	a	primary	quality	of
the	Creative.	But	all	 square	 things	have	 their	origin	 in	a	straight	 line	and	 in	 turn	 form	solid	bodies.	 In
mathematics,	when	we	 discriminate	 between	 lines,	 planes,	 and	 solids,	we	 find	 that	 rectangular	 planes
result	 from	straight	 lines,	and	cubic	magnitudes	from	rectangular	planes.	The	Receptive	accommodates
itself	to	the	qualities	of	the	Creative	and	makes	them	its	own.	Thus	a	square	develops	out	of	a	straight	line
and	 a	 cube	 out	 of	 a	 square.	 This	 is	 compliance	 with	 the	 laws	 of	 the	 Creative;	 nothing	 is	 taken	 away,
nothing	added.	Therefore	the	Receptive	has	no	need	of	a	special	purpose	of	its	own,	nor	of	any	effort;	yet
everything	turns	out	as	it	should.
Nature	 creates	 all	 beings	 without	 erring:	 this	 is	 its	 straightness.	 It	 is	 calm	 and	 still:	 this	 is	 its

foursquareness.	It	tolerates	all	creatures	equally:	this	is	its	greatness.	Therefore	it	attains	what	is	right	for
all	without	artifice	or	special	 intentions.	Man	achieves	the	height	of	wisdom	when	all	that	he	does	is	as
self-evident	as	what	nature	does.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Hidden	lines.
One	is	able	to	remain	persevering.
If	by	chance	you	are	in	the	service	of	a	king,
Seek	not	works,	but	bring	to	completion.

If	a	man	is	free	of	vanity	he	is	able	to	conceal	his	abilities	and	keep	them	from	attracting	attention	too
soon;	thus	he	can	mature	undisturbed.	If	conditions	demand	it,	he	can	also	enter	public	life,	but	that	too
he	does	with	restraint.	The	wise	man	gladly	leaves	fame	to	others.	He	does	not	seek	to	have	credited	to
himself	things	that	stand	accomplished,	but	hopes	to	release	active	forces;	that	is,	he	completes	his	works
in	such	a	manner	that	they	may	bear	fruit	for	the	future.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
A	tied-up	sack.	No	blame,	no	praise.

The	dark	element	opens	when	 it	moves	and	closes	when	at	rest.2	The	strictest	reticence	 is	 indicated
here.	The	time	is	dangerous,	because	any	degree	of	prominence	leads	either	to	the	enmity	of	irresistible
antagonists	if	one	challenges	them	or	to	misconceived	recognition	if	one	is	complaisant.	Therefore	a	man
ought	to	maintain	reserve,	be	it	in	solitude	or	in	the	turmoil	of	the	world,	for	there	too	he	can	hide	himself
so	well	that	no	one	knows	him.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
A	yellow	lower	garment	brings	supreme	good	fortune.

Yellow	is	the	color	of	the	earth	and	of	the	middle;	it	is	the	symbol	of	that	which	is	reliable	and	genuine.
The	 lower	 garment	 is	 inconspicuously	 decorated—the	 symbol	 of	 aristocratic	 reserve.	 When	 anyone	 is
called	upon	 to	work	 in	 a	 prominent	 but	 not	 independent	 position,	 true	 success	 depends	 on	 the	utmost
discretion.	 A	 man’s	 genuineness	 and	 refinement	 should	 not	 reveal	 themselves	 directly;	 they	 should
express	themselves	only	indirectly	as	an	effect	from	within.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Dragons	fight	in	the	meadow.
Their	blood	is	black	and	yellow.

In	the	top	place	the	dark	element	should	yield	to	the	light.	If	it	attempts	to	maintain	a	position	to	which
it	 is	 not	 entitled	 and	 to	 rule	 instead	 of	 serving,	 it	 draws	 down	 upon	 itself	 the	 anger	 of	 the	 strong.	 A
struggle	 ensues	 in	 which	 it	 is	 overthrown,	 with	 injury,	 however,	 to	 both	 sides.	 The	 dragon,	 symbol	 of
heaven,	comes	to	fight	the	false	dragon	that	symbolizes	the	inflation	of	the	earth	principle.	Midnight	blue
is	the	color	of	heaven;	yellow	is	the	color	of	the	earth.	Therefore,	when	black	and	yellow	blood	flow,	it	is	a
sign	that	in	this	unnatural	contest	both	primal	powers	suffer	injury.3

When	all	the	lines	are	sixes,	it	means:
Lasting	perseverance	furthers.

When	nothing	but	sixes	appears,	the	hexagram	of	THE	RECEPTIVE	changes	into	the	hexagram	of	THE
CREATIVE.	By	holding	fast	to	what	is	right,	it	gains	the	power	of	enduring.	There	is	indeed	no	advance,
but	neither	is	there	retrogression.



3.	Chun	/	Difficulty	at	the	Beginning

The	name	of	 the	hexagram,	Chun,	really	connotes	a	blade	of	grass	pushing	against	an	obstacle	as	 it
sprouts	out	of	 the	earth—hence	 the	meaning,	 “difficulty	at	 the	beginning.”	The	hexagram	 indicates	 the
way	in	which	heaven	and	earth	bring	forth	individual	beings.	It	is	their	first	meeting,	which	is	beset	with
difficulties.	The	lower	trigram	Chên	is	the	Arousing;	 its	motion	is	upward	and	its	 image	is	thunder.	The
upper	trigram	K’an	stands	for	the	Abysmal,	the	dangerous.	Its	motion	is	downward	and	its	image	is	rain.
The	situation	points	to	teeming,	chaotic	profusion;	thunder	and	rain	fill	the	air.	But	the	chaos	clears	up.
While	 the	Abysmal	 sinks,	 the	 upward	movement	 eventually	 passes	 beyond	 the	 danger.	 A	 thunderstorm
brings	release	from	tension,	and	all	things	breathe	freely	again.

THE	JUDGMENT
Difficulty	at	the	Beginning	works	supreme	success,
Furthering	through	perseverance.
Nothing	should	be	undertaken.
It	furthers	one	to	appoint	helpers.

Times	of	growth	are	beset	with	difficulties.	They	resemble	a	first	birth.	But	these	difficulties	arise	from
the	 very	 profusion	 of	 all	 that	 is	 struggling	 to	 attain	 form.	 Everything	 is	 in	 motion:	 therefore	 if	 one
perseveres	there	is	a	prospect	of	great	success,	in	spite	of	the	existing	danger.	When	it	is	a	man’s	fate	to
undertake	such	new	beginnings,	everything	is	still	unformed,	dark.	Hence	he	must	hold	back,	because	any
premature	 move	 might	 bring	 disaster.	 Likewise,	 it	 is	 very	 important	 not	 to	 remain	 alone;	 in	 order	 to
overcome	the	chaos	he	needs	helpers.	This	is	not	to	say,	however,	that	he	himself	should	look	on	passively
at	what	is	happening.	He	must	lend	his	hand	and	participate	with	inspiration	and	guidance.

THE	IMAGE
Clouds	and	thunder:
The	image	of	Difficulty	at	the	Beginning.
Thus	the	superior	man
Brings	order	out	of	confusion.

Clouds	 and	 thunder	 are	 represented	 by	 definite	 decorative	 lines;	 this	 means	 that	 in	 the	 chaos	 of
difficulty	at	the	beginning,	order	is	already	implicit.	So	too	the	superior	man	has	to	arrange	and	organize
the	inchoate	profusion	of	such	times	of	beginning,	just	as	one	sorts	out	silk	threads	from	a	knotted	tangle
and	binds	them	into	skeins.	In	order	to	find	one’s	place	in	the	infinity	of	being,	one	must	be	able	both	to
separate	and	to	unite.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Hesitation	and	hindrance.
It	furthers	one	to	remain	persevering.
It	furthers	one	to	appoint	helpers.

If	a	person	encounters	a	hindrance	at	the	beginning	of	an	enterprise,	he	must	not	try	to	force	advance
but	must	pause	and	take	thought.	However,	nothing	should	put	him	off	his	course;	he	must	persevere	and
constantly	keep	the	goal	in	sight.	It	is	important	to	seek	out	the	right	assistants,	but	he	can	find	them	only
if	he	avoids	arrogance	and	associates	with	his	fellows	in	a	spirit	of	humility.	Only	then	will	he	attract	those
with	whose	help	he	can	combat	the	difficulties.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Difficulties	pile	up.
Horse	and	wagon	part.
He	is	not	a	robber;
He	wants	to	woo	when	the	time	comes.
The	maiden	is	chaste,
She	does	not	pledge	herself.
Ten	years—then	she	pledges	herself.

We	find	ourselves	beset	by	difficulties	and	hindrances.	Suddenly	there	is	a	turn	of	affairs,	as	if	someone
were	coming	up	with	a	horse	and	wagon	and	unhitching	them.	This	event	comes	so	unexpectedly	that	we
assume	the	newcomer	to	be	a	robber.	Gradually	it	becomes	clear	that	he	has	no	evil	intentions	but	seeks
to	be	friendly	and	to	offer	help.	But	this	offer	 is	not	to	be	accepted,	because	it	does	not	come	from	the
right	quarter.	We	must	wait	until	 the	time	is	 fulfilled;	 ten	years	 is	a	 fulfilled	cycle	of	 time.	Then	normal
conditions	return	of	themselves,	and	we	can	join	forces	with	the	friend	intended	for	us.

Using	 the	 image	 of	 a	 betrothed	 girl	 who	 remains	 true	 to	 her	 lover	 in	 face	 of	 grave	 conflicts,	 the
hexagram	gives	counsel	for	a	special	situation.	When	in	times	of	difficulty	a	hindrance	is	encountered	and
unexpected	relief	is	offered	from	a	source	unrelated	to	us,	we	must	be	careful	and	not	take	upon	ourselves
any	obligations	entailed	by	such	help;	otherwise	our	freedom	of	decision	is	impaired.	If	we	bide	our	time,
things	will	quiet	down	again,	and	we	shall	attain	what	we	have	hoped	for.1

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Whoever	hunts	deer	without	the	forester
Only	loses	his	way	in	the	forest.



The	superior	man	understands	the	signs	of	the	time
And	prefers	to	desist.
To	go	on	brings	humiliation.

If	a	man	tries	to	hunt	in	a	strange	forest	and	has	no	guide,	he	loses	his	way.	When	he	finds	himself	in
difficulties	he	must	not	try	to	steal	out	of	them	unthinkingly	and	without	guidance.	Fate	cannot	be	duped;
premature	 effort,	without	 the	necessary	guidance,	 ends	 in	 failure	 and	disgrace.	Therefore	 the	 superior
man,	discerning	the	seeds	of	coming	events,	prefers	to	renounce	a	wish	rather	than	to	provoke	failure	and
humiliation	by	trying	to	force	its	fulfillment.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Horse	and	wagon	part.
Strive	for	union.
To	go	brings	good	fortune.
Everything	acts	to	further.

We	 are	 in	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 it	 is	 our	 duty	 to	 act,	 but	 we	 lack	 sufficient	 power.	 However,	 an
opportunity	 to	 make	 connections	 offers	 itself.	 It	 must	 be	 seized.	 Neither	 false	 pride	 nor	 false	 reserve
should	deter	 us.	Bringing	 oneself	 to	 take	 the	 first	 step,	 even	when	 it	 involves	 a	 certain	 degree	 of	 self-
abnegation,	is	a	sign	of	inner	clarity.	To	accept	help	in	a	difficult	situation	is	not	a	disgrace.	If	the	right
helper	is	found,	all	goes	well.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Difficulties	in	blessing.
A	little	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Great	perseverance	brings	misfortune.

An	individual	is	in	a	position	in	which	he	cannot	so	express	his	good	intentions	that	they	will	actually
take	shape	and	be	understood.	Other	people	interpose	and	distort	everything	he	does.	He	should	then	be
cautious	and	proceed	step	by	step.	He	must	not	 try	 to	 force	 the	consummation	of	a	great	undertaking,
because	success	is	possible	only	when	general	confidence	already	prevails.	It	is	only	through	faithful	and
conscientious	work,	 unobtrusively	 carried	 on,	 that	 the	 situation	 gradually	 clears	 up	 and	 the	 hindrance
disappears.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Horse	and	wagon	part.
Bloody	tears	flow.

The	difficulties	at	 the	beginning	are	too	great	 for	some	persons.	They	get	stuck	and	never	 find	their
way	 out;	 they	 fold	 their	 hands	 and	 give	 up	 the	 struggle.	 Such	 resignation	 is	 the	 saddest	 of	 all	 things.
Therefore	Confucius	says	of	this	line:	“Bloody	tears	flow:	one	should	not	persist	in	this.”



4.	Mêng	/	Youthful	Folly

In	this	hexagram	we	are	reminded	of	youth	and	folly1	 in	 two	different	ways.	The	 image	of	 the	upper
trigram,	 Kên,	 is	 the	 mountain,	 that	 of	 the	 lower,	 K’an,	 is	 water;	 the	 spring	 rising	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the
mountain	is	the	image	of	inexperienced	youth.	Keeping	still	is	the	attribute	of	the	upper	trigram;	that	of
the	lower	is	the	abyss,	danger.	Stopping	in	perplexity	on	the	brink	of	a	dangerous	abyss	is	a	symbol	of	the
folly	of	youth.	However,	the	two	trigrams	also	show	the	way	of	overcoming	the	follies	of	youth.	Water	is
something	that	of	necessity	flows	on.	When	the	spring	gushes	forth,	it	does	not	know	at	first	where	it	will
go.	But	its	steady	flow	fills	up	the	deep	place	blocking	its	progress,	and	success	is	attained.

THE	JUDGMENT
YOUTHFUL	FOLLY	has	success.
It	is	not	I	who	seek	the	young	fool;
The	young	fool	seeks	me.
At	the	first	oracle	I	inform	him.
If	he	asks	two	or	three	times,	it	is	importunity.
If	he	importunes,	I	give	him	no	information.
Perseverance	furthers.

In	 the	 time	 of	 youth,	 folly	 is	 not	 an	 evil.	 One	 may	 succeed	 in	 spite	 of	 it,	 provided	 one	 finds	 an
experienced	teacher	and	has	the	right	attitude	toward	him.	This	means,	first	of	all,	that	the	youth	himself
must	be	conscious	of	his	lack	of	experience	and	must	seek	out	the	teacher.	Without	this	modesty	and	this
interest	 there	 is	 no	 guarantee	 that	 he	 has	 the	 necessary	 receptivity,	 which	 should	 express	 itself	 in
respectful	 acceptance	 of	 the	 teacher.	 This	 is	 the	 reason	 why	 the	 teacher	 must	 wait	 to	 be	 sought	 out
instead	of	offering	himself.	Only	thus	can	the	instruction	take	place	at	the	right	time	and	in	the	right	way.

A	teacher’s	answer	to	the	question	of	a	pupil	ought	to	be	clear	and	definite	like	that	expected	from	an
oracle;	 thereupon	 it	 ought	 to	be	accepted	as	a	key	 for	 resolution	of	doubts	 and	a	basis	 for	decision.	 If
mistrustful	or	unintelligent	questioning	 is	kept	up,	 it	 serves	only	 to	annoy	 the	 teacher.	He	does	well	 to
ignore	 it	 in	 silence,	 just	 as	 the	 oracle	 gives	 one	 answer	 only	 and	 refuses	 to	 be	 tempted	 by	 questions
implying	doubt.

Given	 in	addition	a	perseverance	 that	never	 slackens	until	 the	points	are	mastered	one	by	one,	 real
success	is	sure	to	follow.	Thus	the	hexagram	counsels	the	teacher	as	well	as	the	pupil.

THE	IMAGE
A	spring	wells	up	at	the	foot	of	the	mountain:
The	image	Of	YOUTH.
Thus	the	superior	man	fosters	his	character
By	thoroughness	in	all	that	he	does.

A	spring	succeeds	in	flowing	on	and	escapes	stagnation	by	filling	up	all	the	hollow	places	in	its	path.	In
the	same	way	character	 is	developed	by	 thoroughness	 that	skips	nothing	but,	 like	water,	gradually	and
steadily	fills	up	all	gaps	and	so	flows	onward.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
To	make	a	fool	develop
It	furthers	one	to	apply	discipline.
The	fetters	should	be	removed.
To	go	on	in	this	way	brings	humiliation.

Law	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 education.	 Youth	 in	 its	 inexperience	 is	 inclined	 at	 first	 to	 take	 everything
carelessly	and	playfully.	It	must	be	shown	the	seriousness	of	life.	A	certain	measure	of	taking	oneself	 in
hand,	 brought	 about	 by	 strict	 discipline,	 is	 a	 good	 thing.	 He	 who	 plays	 with	 life	 never	 amounts	 to
anything.	However,	discipline	should	not	degenerate	 into	drill.	Continuous	drill	has	a	humiliating	effect
and	cripples	a	man’s	powers.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
To	bear	with	fools	in	kindliness	brings	good	fortune.
To	know	how	to	take	women
Brings	good	fortune.
The	son	is	capable	of	taking	charge	of	the	household.

These	lines	picture	a	man	who	has	no	external	power,	but	who	has	enough	strength	of	mind	to	bear	his
burden	 of	 responsibility.	 He	 has	 the	 inner	 superiority	 and	 strength	 that	 enable	 him	 to	 tolerate	 with
kindliness	the	shortcomings	of	human	folly.	The	same	attitude	is	owed	to	women	as	the	weaker	sex.	One
must	 understand	 them	 and	 give	 them	 recognition	 in	 a	 spirit	 of	 chivalrous	 consideration.	 Only	 this
combination	of	inner	strength	with	outer	reserve	enables	one	to	take	on	the	responsibility	of	directing	a
larger	social	body	with	real	success.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Take	not	a	maiden	who,	when	she	sees	a	man	of	bronze,
Loses	possession	of	herself.
Nothing	furthers.



A	weak,	 inexperienced	man,	 struggling	 to	 rise,	 easily	 loses	 his	 own	 individuality	 when	 he	 slavishly
imitates	a	strong	personality	of	higher	station.	He	is	like	a	girl	throwing	herself	away	when	she	meets	a
strong	man.	Such	a	servile	approach	should	not	be	encouraged,	because	it	is	bad	both	for	the	youth	and
the	teacher.	A	girl	owes	it	to	her	dignity	to	wait	until	she	is	wooed.	In	both	cases	it	is	undignified	to	offer
oneself,	and	no	good	comes	of	accepting	such	an	offer.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Entangled	folly	brings	humiliation.

For	 youthful	 folly	 it	 is	 the	 most	 hopeless	 thing	 to	 entangle	 itself	 in	 empty	 imaginings.	 The	 more
obstinately	it	clings	to	such	unreal	fantasies,	the	more	certainly	will	humiliation	overtake	it.

Often	the	teacher,	when	confronted	with	such	entangled	folly,	has	no	other	course	but	to	leave	the	fool
to	himself	 for	a	 time,	not	sparing	him	the	humiliation	 that	 results.	This	 is	 frequently	 the	only	means	of
rescue.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Childlike	folly	brings	good	fortune.

An	inexperienced	person	who	seeks	instruction	in	a	childlike	and	unassuming	way	is	on	the	right	path,
for	the	man	devoid	of	arrogance	who	subordinates	himself	to	his	teacher	will	certainly	be	helped.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
In	punishing	folly
It	does	not	further	one
To	commit	transgressions.
The	only	thing	that	furthers
Is	to	prevent	transgressions.

Sometimes	 an	 incorrigible	 fool	 must	 be	 punished.	 He	 who	 will	 not	 heed	 will	 be	made	 to	 feel.	 This
punishment	 is	quite	different	 from	a	preliminary	 shaking	up.	But	 the	penalty	 should	not	be	 imposed	 in
anger;	it	must	be	restricted	to	an	objective	guarding	against	unjustified	excesses.	Punishment	is	never	an
end	in	itself	but	serves	merely	to	restore	order.

This	applies	not	only	in	regard	to	education	but	also	in	regard	to	the	measures	taken	by	a	government
against	 a	 populace	 guilty	 of	 transgressions.	 Governmental	 interference	 should	 always	 be	 merely
preventive	and	should	have	as	its	sole	aim	the	establishment	of	public	security	and	peace.



5.	Hsü	/	Waiting	(Nourishment)

All	beings	have	need	of	nourishment1	 from	above.	But	the	gift	of	food	comes	in	its	own	time,	and	for
this	one	must	wait.	This	hexagram	shows	the	clouds	in	the	heavens,	giving	rain	to	refresh	all	that	grows
and	to	provide	mankind	with	food	and	drink.	The	rain	will	come	in	its	own	time.	We	cannot	make	it	come;
we	have	 to	wait	 for	 it.	The	 idea	of	waiting	 is	 further	 suggested	by	 the	attributes	of	 the	 two	 trigrams—
strength	within,	danger	in	front.2	Strength	in	the	face	of	danger	does	not	plunge	ahead	but	bides	its	time,
whereas	weakness	in	the	face	of	danger	grows	agitated	and	has	not	the	patience	to	wait.

THE	JUDGMENT
WAITING.	If	you	are	sincere,
You	have	light	and	success.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.

Waiting	is	not	mere	empty	hoping.	It	has	the	inner	certainty	of	reaching	the	goal.	Such	certainty	alone
gives	 that	 light	 which	 leads	 to	 success.	 This	 leads	 to	 the	 perseverance	 that	 brings	 good	 fortune	 and
bestows	power	to	cross	the	great	water.

One	is	faced	with	a	danger	that	has	to	be	overcome.	Weakness	and	impatience	can	do	nothing.	Only	a
strong	man	can	stand	up	to	his	fate,	for	his	inner	security	enables	him	to	endure	to	the	end.	This	strength
shows	itself	 in	uncompromising	truthfulness	[with	himself].	It	 is	only	when	we	have	the	courage	to	face
things	exactly	as	 they	are,	without	any	sort	of	self-deception	or	 illusion,	 that	a	 light	will	develop	out	of
events,	by	which	the	path	to	success	may	be	recognized.	This	recognition	must	be	 followed	by	resolute
and	persevering	action.	For	only	the	man	who	goes	to	meet	his	fate	resolutely	is	equipped	to	deal	with	it
adequately.	Then	he	will	be	able	to	cross	the	great	water—that	is	to	say,	he	will	be	capable	of	making	the
necessary	decision	and	of	surmounting	the	danger.

THE	IMAGE
Clouds	rise	up	to	heaven:
The	image	of	WAITING.
Thus	the	superior	man	eats	and	drinks,
Is	joyous	and	of	good	cheer.

When	clouds	rise	in	the	sky,	it	is	a	sign	that	it	will	rain.	There	is	nothing	to	do	but	to	wait	until	the	rain
falls.	It	is	the	same	in	life	when	destiny	is	at	work.	We	should	not	worry	and	seek	to	shape	the	future	by
interfering	in	things	before	the	time	is	ripe.	We	should	quietly	fortify	the	body	with	food	and	drink	and	the
mind	with	gladness	and	good	cheer.	Fate	comes	when	it	will,	and	thus	we	are	ready.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Waiting	in	the	meadow.
It	furthers	one	to	abide	in	what	endures.
No	blame.

The	danger	is	not	yet	close.	One	is	still	waiting	on	the	open	plain.	Conditions	are	still	simple,	yet	there
is	a	feeling	of	something	impending.	One	must	continue	to	lead	a	regular	life	as	long	as	possible.	Only	in
this	way	does	one	guard	against	a	premature	waste	of	strength,	keep	free	of	blame	and	error	that	would
become	a	source	of	weakness	later	on.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Waiting	on	the	sand.
There	is	some	gossip.
The	end	brings	good	fortune.

The	danger	gradually	comes	closer.	Sand	is	near	the	bank	of	the	river,	and	the	water	means	danger.
Disagreements	crop	up.	General	unrest	 can	easily	develop	 in	 such	 times,	and	we	 lay	 the	blame	on	one
another.	He	who	stays	calm	will	succeed	in	making	things	go	well	in	the	end.	Slander	will	be	silenced	if
we	do	not	gratify	it	with	injured	retorts.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Waiting	in	the	mud
Brings	about	the	arrival	of	the	enemy.

Mud	 is	no	place	 for	waiting,	since	 it	 is	already	being	washed	by	 the	water	of	 the	stream.	 Instead	of
having	gathered	strength	to	cross	the	stream	at	one	try,	one	has	made	a	premature	start	that	has	got	him
no	 farther	 than	 the	 muddy	 bank.	 Such	 an	 unfavorable	 position	 invites	 enemies	 from	 without,	 who
naturally	take	advantage	of	it.	Caution	and	a	sense	of	the	seriousness	of	the	situation	are	all	that	can	keep
one	from	injury.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Waiting	in	blood.
Get	out	of	the	pit.

The	situation	is	extremely	dangerous.	It	is	of	utmost	gravity	now—a	matter	of	life	and	death.	Bloodshed
seems	imminent.	There	is	no	going	forward	or	backward;	we	are	cut	off	as	if	in	a	pit.	Now	we	must	simply
stand	fast	and	let	fate	take	its	course.	This	composure,	which	keeps	us	from	aggravating	the	trouble	by



anything	we	might	do,	is	the	only	way	of	getting	out	of	the	dangerous	pit.
Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:

Waiting	at	meat	and	drink.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

Even	in	the	midst	of	danger	there	come	intervals	of	peace	when	things	go	relatively	well.	If	we	possess
enough	 inner	 strength,	 we	 shall	 take	 advantage	 of	 these	 intervals	 to	 fortify	 ourselves	 for	 renewed
struggle.	We	must	know	how	to	enjoy	the	moment	without	being	deflected	from	the	goal,	for	perseverance
is	needed	to	remain	victorious.

This	 is	 true	 in	 public	 life	 as	well;	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 achieve	 everything	 all	 at	 once.	 The	 height	 of
wisdom	is	to	allow	people	enough	recreation	to	quicken	pleasure	in	their	work	until	the	task	is	completed.
Herein	lies	the	secret	of	the	whole	hexagram.	It	differs	from	Chien,	OBSTRUCTION	(39),	in	the	fact	that
in	 this	 instance,	while	waiting,	we	are	sure	of	our	cause	and	therefore	do	not	 lose	 the	serenity	born	of
inner	cheerfulness.

Six	at	the	top	means:
One	falls	into	the	pit.
Three	uninvited	guests	arrive.
Honor	them,	and	in	the	end	there	will	be	good	fortune.

The	waiting	is	over;	the	danger	can	no	longer	be	averted.	One	falls	into	the	pit	and	must	yield	to	the
inevitable.	 Everything	 seems	 to	 have	 been	 in	 vain.	 But	 precisely	 in	 this	 extremity	 things	 take	 an
unforeseen	turn.	Without	a	move	on	one’s	own	part,	there	is	outside	intervention.	At	first	one	cannot	be
sure	of	its	meaning:	is	it	rescue	or	is	it	destruction?	A	person	in	this	situation	must	keep	his	mind	alert
and	not	withdraw	into	himself	with	a	sulky	gesture	of	refusal,	but	must	greet	the	new	turn	with	respect.
Thus	he	ultimately	escapes	 the	danger,	 and	all	goes	well.	Even	happy	 turns	of	 fortune	often	come	 in	a
form	that	at	first	seems	strange	to	us.



6.	Sung	/	Conflict

The	 upper	 trigram,	whose	 image	 is	 heaven,	 has	 an	 upward	movement;	 the	 lower	 trigram,	water,	 in
accordance	with	its	nature,	tends	downward.	Thus	the	two	halves	move	away	from	each	other,	giving	rise
to	the	idea	of	conflict.
The	attribute	of	the	Creative	is	strength,	that	of	the	Abysmal	is	danger,	guile.	Where	cunning	has	force

before	it,	there	is	conflict.
A	third	 indication	of	conflict,	 in	terms	of	character,	 is	presented	by	the	combination	of	deep	cunning

within	and	fixed	determination	outwardly.	A	person	of	this	character	will	certainly	be	quarrelsome.
THE	JUDGMENT
CONFLICT.	You	are	sincere
And	are	being	obstructed.
A	cautious	halt	halfway	brings	good	fortune.
Going	through	to	the	end	brings	misfortune.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
It	does	not	further	one	to	cross	the	great	water.

Conflict	 develops	 when	 one	 feels	 himself	 to	 be	 in	 the	 right	 and	 runs	 into	 opposition.	 If	 one	 is	 not
convinced	of	being	 in	 the	 right,	 opposition	 leads	 to	 craftiness	or	high-handed	encroachment	but	not	 to
open	conflict.
If	a	man	is	entangled	in	a	conflict,	his	only	salvation	lies	in	being	so	clear-headed	and	inwardly	strong

that	he	is	always	ready	to	come	to	terms	by	meeting	the	opponent	halfway.	To	carry	on	the	conflict	to	the
bitter	 end	has	evil	 effects	 even	when	one	 is	 in	 the	 right,	 because	 the	enmity	 is	 then	perpetuated.	 It	 is
important	to	see	the	great	man,	that	is,	an	impartial	man	whose	authority	is	great	enough	to	terminate	the
conflict	amicably	or	assure	a	 just	decision.	 In	 times	of	strife,	crossing	the	great	water	 is	 to	be	avoided,
that	 is,	 dangerous	 enterprises	 are	 not	 to	 be	 begun,	 because	 in	 order	 to	 be	 successful	 they	 require
concerted	unity	of	forces.	Conflict	within	weakens	the	power	to	conquer	danger	without.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	and	water	go	their	opposite	ways:
The	image	of	CONFLICT.
Thus	in	all	his	transactions	the	superior	man
Carefully	considers	the	beginning.

The	 image	 indicates	 that	 the	 causes	 of	 conflict	 are	 latent	 in	 the	 opposing	 tendencies	 of	 the	 two
trigrams.	Once	these	opposing	tendencies	appear,	conflict	is	inevitable.	To	avoid	it,	therefore,	everything
must	be	taken	carefully	into	consideration	in	the	very	beginning.	If	rights	and	duties	are	exactly	defined,
or	 if,	 in	 a	 group,	 the	 spiritual	 trends	 of	 the	 individuals	 harmonize,	 the	 cause	 of	 conflict	 is	 removed	 in
advance.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
If	one	does	not	perpetuate	the	affair,
There	is	a	little	gossip.
In	the	end,	good	fortune	comes.

While	a	conflict	is	in	the	incipient	stage,	the	best	thing	to	do	is	to	drop	the	issue.	Especially	when	the
adversary	is	stronger,	it	is	not	advisable	to	risk	pushing	the	conflict	to	a	decision.	It	may	come	to	a	slight
dispute,	but	in	the	end	all	goes	well.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
One	cannot	engage	in	conflict;
One	returns	home,	gives	way.
The	people	of	his	town,
Three	hundred	households,
Remain	free	of	guilt.

In	a	struggle	with	an	enemy	of	superior	strength,	retreat	 is	no	disgrace.	Timely	withdrawal	prevents
bad	consequences.	If,	out	of	a	false	sense	of	honor,	a	man	allowed	himself	to	be	tempted	into	an	unequal
conflict,	he	would	be	drawing	down	disaster	upon	himself.	In	such	a	case	a	wise	and	conciliatory	attitude
benefits	the	whole	community,	which	will	then	not	be	drawn	into	the	conflict.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
To	nourish	oneself	on	ancient	virtue	induces	perseverance.
Danger.	In	the	end,	good	fortune	comes.
If	by	chance	you	are	in	the	service	of	a	king,
Seek	not	works.

This	 is	 a	warning	 of	 the	 danger	 that	 goes	with	 an	 expansive	 disposition.	 Only	 that	which	 has	 been
honestly	acquired	through	merit	remains	a	permanent	possession.	It	can	happen	that	such	a	possession
may	be	contested,	but	since	it	is	really	one’s	own,	one	cannot	be	robbed	of	it.	Whatever	a	man	possesses
through	 the	 strength	of	his	own	nature	cannot	be	 lost.	 If	 one	enters	 the	 service	of	a	 superior,	 one	can
avoid	conflict	only	by	not	seeking	works	for	the	sake	of	prestige.	It	is	enough	if	the	work	is	done:	let	the



honor	go	to	the	other.
Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
One	cannot	engage	in	conflict.
One	turns	back	and	submits	to	fate,
Changes	one’s	attitude,
And	finds	peace	in	perseverance.
Good	fortune.

This	 refers	 to	 a	 person	whose	 inner	 attitude	 at	 first	 lacks	 peace.	He	 does	 not	 feel	 content	with	 his
situation	 and	 would	 like	 to	 improve	 it	 through	 conflict.	 In	 contrast	 to	 the	 situation	 of	 the	 nine	 in	 the
second	place,	he	is	dealing	with	a	weaker	opponent	and	might	therefore	succeed.	But	he	cannot	carry	on
the	fight,	because,	since	right	is	not	on	his	side,	he	cannot	justify	the	conflict	to	his	conscience.	Therefore
he	 turns	 back	 and	 accepts	 his	 fate.	He	 changes	 his	mind	 and	 finds	 lasting	 peace	 in	 being	 at	 one	with
eternal	law.	This	brings	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
To	contend	before	him
Brings	supreme	good	fortune.

This	refers	to	an	arbiter	in	a	conflict	who	is	powerful	and	just,	and	strong	enough	to	lend	weight	to	the
right	side.	A	dispute	can	be	turned	over	to	him	with	confidence.	If	one	is	 in	the	right,	one	attains	great
good	fortune.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Even	if	by	chance	a	leather	belt	is	bestowed	on	one,
By	the	end	of	a	morning
It	will	have	been	snatched	away	three	times.

Here	we	have	someone	who	has	carried	a	conflict	to	the	bitter	end	and	has	triumphed.	He	is	granted	a
decoration,	 but	 his	 happiness	 does	 not	 last.	 He	 is	 attacked	 again	 and	 again,	 and	 the	 result	 is	 conflict
without	end.



7.	Shih	/	The	Army

This	 hexagram	 is	made	 up	 of	 the	 trigrams	K’an,	water,	 and	K’un,	 earth,	 and	 thus	 it	 symbolizes	 the
ground	water	stored	up	 in	 the	earth.	 In	 the	same	way	military	strength	 is	stored	up	 in	 the	mass	of	 the
people—invisible	 in	times	of	peace	but	always	ready	for	use	as	a	source	of	power.	The	attributes	of	 the
two	trigrams	are	danger	inside	and	obedience	outside.	This	points	to	the	nature	of	an	army,	which	at	the
core	is	dangerous,	while	discipline	and	obedience	must	prevail	outside.
Of	the	 individual	 lines,	the	one	that	controls	the	hexagram	is	the	strong	nine	in	the	second	place,	to

which	the	other	lines,	all	yielding,	are	subordinate.	This	line	indicates	a	commander,	because	it	stands	in
the	 middle	 of	 one	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams.	 But	 since	 it	 is	 in	 the	 lower	 rather	 than	 the	 upper	 trigram,	 it
represents	not	the	ruler	but	the	efficient	general,	who	maintains	obedience	in	the	army	by	his	authority.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	ARMY.	The	army	needs	perseverance
And	a	strong	man.
Good	fortune	without	blame.

An	army	is	a	mass	that	needs	organization	in	order	to	become	a	fighting	force.	Without	strict	discipline
nothing	can	be	accomplished,	but	this	discipline	must	not	be	achieved	by	force.	It	requires	a	strong	man
who	captures	the	hearts	of	 the	people	and	awakens	their	enthusiasm.	In	order	that	he	may	develop	his
abilities	he	needs	the	complete	confidence	of	his	ruler,	who	must	entrust	him	with	 full	responsibility	as
long	as	the	war	lasts.	But	war	is	always	a	dangerous	thing	and	brings	with	it	destruction	and	devastation.
Therefore	it	should	not	be	resorted	to	rashly	but,	like	a	poisonous	drug,	should	be	used	as	a	last	recourse.
The	justifying	cause	of	a	war,	and	clear	and	intelligible	war	aims,	ought	to	be	explained	to	the	people

by	an	experienced	 leader.	Unless	 there	 is	a	quite	definite	war	aim	 to	which	 the	people	can	consciously
pledge	themselves,	the	unity	and	strength	of	conviction	that	lead	to	victory	will	not	be	forthcoming.	But
the	leader	must	also	look	to	it	that	the	passion	of	war	and	the	delirium	of	victory	do	not	give	rise	to	unjust
acts	that	will	not	meet	with	general	approval.	If	justice	and	perseverance	are	the	basis	of	action,	all	goes
well.

THE	IMAGE
In	the	middle	of	the	earth	is	water:
The	image	of	THE	ARMY.
Thus	the	superior	man	increases	his	masses
By	generosity	toward	the	people.

Ground	water	is	invisibly	present	within	the	earth.	In	the	same	way	the	military	power	of	a	people	is
invisibly	present	in	the	masses.	When	danger	threatens,	every	peasant	becomes	a	soldier;	when	the	war
ends,	he	goes	back	to	his	plow.	He	who	is	generous	toward	the	people	wins	their	love,	and	a	people	living
under	a	mild	rule	becomes	strong	and	powerful.	Only	a	people	economically	strong	can	be	important	in
military	 power.	 Such	 power	 must	 therefore	 be	 cultivated	 by	 improving	 the	 economic	 condition	 of	 the
people	 and	 by	 humane	 government.	 Only	 when	 there	 is	 this	 invisible	 bond	 between	 government	 and
people,	so	that	the	people	are	sheltered	by	their	government	as	ground	water	is	sheltered	by	the	earth,	is
it	possible	to	wage	a	victorious	war.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
An	army	must	set	forth	in	proper	order.
If	the	order	is	not	good,	misfortune	threatens.

At	the	beginning	of	a	military	enterprise,	order	is	imperative.	A	just	and	valid	cause	must	exist,	and	the
obedience	and	coordination	of	the	troops	must	be	well	organized,	otherwise	the	result	is	inevitably	failure.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
In	the	midst	of	the	army.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.
The	king	bestows	a	triple	decoration.

The	leader	should	be	in	the	midst	of	his	army,	in	touch	with	it,	sharing	good	and	bad	with	the	masses
he	 leads.	 This	 alone	 makes	 him	 equal	 to	 the	 heavy	 demands	 made	 upon	 him.	 He	 needs	 also	 the
recognition	of	the	ruler.	The	decorations	he	receives	are	justified,	because	there	is	no	question	of	personal
preferment	here:	the	whole	army,	whose	center	he	is,	is	honored	in	his	person.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Perchance	the	army	carries	corpses	in	the	wagon.
Misfortune.

Here	 we	 have	 a	 choice	 of	 two	 explanations.	 One	 points	 to	 defeat	 because	 someone	 other	 than	 the
chosen	 leader	 interferes	 with	 the	 command;	 the	 other	 is	 similar	 in	 its	 general	 meaning,	 but	 the
expression,	“carries	corpses	 in	 the	wagon,”	 is	 interpreted	differently.	At	burials	and	at	sacrifices	 to	 the
dead	it	was	customary	in	China	for	the	deceased	to	whom	the	sacrifice	was	made	to	be	represented	by	a
boy	of	the	family,	who	sat	in	the	dead	man’s	place	and	was	honored	as	his	representative.	On	the	basis	of
this	 custom	 the	 text	 is	 interpreted	as	meaning	 that	 a	 “corpse	boy”	 is	 sitting	 in	 the	wagon,	 or,	 in	 other
words,	 that	 authority	 is	 not	 being	 exercised	 by	 the	 proper	 leaders	 but	 has	 been	 usurped	 by	 others.



Perhaps	 the	 whole	 difficulty	 clears	 up	 if	 it	 is	 inferred	 that	 there	 has	 been	 an	 error	 in	 copying.	 The
character	 fan,	meaning	 “all,”	may	have	been	misread	 as	 shih,	which	means	 “corpse.”	Allowing	 for	 this
error,	 the	meaning	would	be	that	 if	 the	multitude	assumes	 leadership	of	 the	army	(rides	 in	the	wagon),
misfortune	will	ensue.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	army	retreats.	No	blame.

In	face	of	a	superior	enemy,	with	whom	it	would	be	hopeless	to	engage	in	battle,	an	orderly	retreat	is
the	only	correct	procedure,	because	it	will	save	the	army	from	defeat	and	disintegration.	It	is	by	no	means
a	sign	of	courage	or	strength	to	insist	upon	engaging	in	a	hopeless	struggle	regardless	of	circumstances.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
There	is	game	in	the	field.
It	furthers	one	to	catch	it.
Without	blame.
Let	the	eldest	lead	the	army.
The	younger	transports	corpses;
Then	perseverance	brings	misfortune.

Game	is	in	the	field—it	has	left	its	usual	haunts	in	the	forest	and	is	devastating	the	fields.	This	points	to
an	enemy	 invasion.	Energetic	 combat	 and	punishment	 are	here	 thoroughly	 justified,	 but	 they	must	not
degenerate	 into	 a	 wild	 melee	 in	 which	 everyone	 fends	 for	 himself.	 Despite	 the	 greatest	 degree	 of
perseverance	and	bravery,	this	would	lead	to	misfortune.	The	army	must	be	directed	by	an	experienced
leader.	It	is	a	matter	of	waging	war,	not	of	permitting	the	mob	to	slaughter	all	who	fall	into	their	hands;	if
they	do,	defeat	will	be	the	result,	and	despite	all	perseverance	there	is	danger	of	misfortune.

Six	at	the	top	means:
The	great	prince	issues	commands,
Founds	states,	vests	families	with	fiefs.
Inferior	people	should	not	be	employed.

The	war	has	ended	successfully,	victory	is	won,	and	the	king	divides	estates	and	fiefs	among	his	faithful
vassals.	But	it	is	important	that	inferior	people	should	not	come	into	power.	If	they	have	helped,	let	them
be	paid	off	with	money,	but	they	should	not	be	awarded	 lands	or	the	privileges	of	rulers,	 lest	power	be
abused.



8.	Pi	/	Holding	Together	[Union]

The	waters	on	the	surface	of	the	earth	flow	together	wherever	they	can,	as	for	example	in	the	ocean,
where	all	the	rivers	come	together.	Symbolically	this	connotes	holding	together	and	the	laws	that	regulate
it.	The	same	idea	is	suggested	by	the	fact	that	all	the	lines	of	the	hexagram	except	the	fifth,	the	place	of
the	ruler,	are	yielding.	The	yielding	 lines	hold	together	because	they	are	 influenced	by	a	man	of	strong
will	 in	 the	 leading	 position,	 a	 man	 who	 is	 their	 center	 of	 union.	 Moreover,	 this	 strong	 and	 guiding
personality	in	turn	holds	together	with	the	others,	finding	in	them	the	complement	of	his	own	nature.

THE	JUDGMENT
HOLDING	TOGETHER	brings	good	fortune.
Inquire	of	the	oracle	once	again
Whether	you	possess	sublimity,	constancy,	and	perseverance;
Then	there	is	no	blame.
Those	who	are	uncertain	gradually	join.
Whoever	comes	too	late
Meets	with	misfortune.

What	is	required	is	that	we	unite	with	others,	 in	order	that	all	may	complement	and	aid	one	another
through	holding	together.	But	such	holding	together	calls	for	a	central	figure	around	whom	other	persons
may	unite.	To	become	a	center	of	 influence	holding	people	 together	 is	a	grave	matter	and	fraught	with
great	 responsibility.	 It	 requires	 greatness	 of	 spirit,	 consistency,	 and	 strength.	 Therefore	 let	 him	 who
wishes	 to	 gather	 others	 about	 him	 ask	 himself	 whether	 he	 is	 equal	 to	 the	 undertaking,	 for	 anyone
attempting	 the	 task	without	a	real	calling	 for	 it	only	makes	confusion	worse	 than	 if	no	union	at	all	had
taken	place.
But	when	there	is	a	real	rallying	point,	those	who	at	first	are	hesitant	or	uncertain	gradually	come	in	of

their	own	accord.	Late-comers	must	suffer	the	consequences,	for	in	holding	together	the	question	of	the
right	time	is	also	important.	Relationships	are	formed	and	firmly	established	according	to	definite	inner
laws.	 Common	 experiences	 strengthen	 these	 ties,	 and	 he	 who	 comes	 too	 late	 to	 share	 in	 these	 basic
experiences	must	suffer	for	it	if,	as	a	straggler,	he	finds	the	door	locked.
If	 a	man	has	 recognized	 the	necessity	 for	 union	and	does	not	 feel	 strong	enough	 to	 function	as	 the

center,	it	is	his	duty	to	become	a	member	of	some	other	organic	fellowship.
THE	IMAGE
On	the	earth	is	water:
The	image	of	HOLDING	TOGETHER.
Thus	the	kings	of	antiquity
Bestowed	the	different	states	as	fiefs
And	cultivated	friendly	relations
With	the	feudal	lords.

Water	fills	up	all	the	empty	places	on	the	earth	and	clings	fast	to	it.	The	social	organization	of	ancient
China	was	based	on	this	principle	of	the	holding	together	of	dependents	and	rulers.	Water	flows	to	unite
with	water,	because	all	parts	of	it	are	subject	to	the	same	laws.	So	too	should	human	society	hold	together
through	a	community	of	 interests	 that	allows	each	 individual	 to	 feel	himself	a	member	of	a	whole.	The
central	power	of	a	social	organization	must	see	to	it	that	every	member	finds	that	his	true	interest	lies	in
holding	together	with	it,	as	was	the	case	in	the	paternal	relationship	between	king	and	vassals	in	ancient
China.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Hold	to	him	in	truth	and	loyalty;
This	is	without	blame.
Truth,	like	a	full	earthen	bowl:
Thus	in	the	end
Good	fortune	comes	from	without.

Fundamental	sincerity	is	the	only	proper	basis	for	forming	relationships.	This	attitude,	symbolized	by	a
full	 earthen	 bowl,	 in	 which	 the	 content	 is	 everything	 and	 the	 empty	 form	 nothing,	 shows	 itself	 not	 in
clever	words	but	through	the	strength	of	what	lies	within	the	speaker.	This	strength	is	so	great	that	it	has
power	to	attract	good	fortune	to	itself	from	without.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Hold	to	him	inwardly.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

If	a	person	responds	perseveringly	and	in	the	right	way	to	the	behests	from	above	that	summon	him	to
action,	his	relations	with	others	are	intrinsic	and	he	does	not	lose	himself.	But	if	a	man	seeks	association
with	others	as	if	he	were	an	obsequious	office	hunter,	he	throws	himself	away.	He	does	not	follow	the	path
of	the	superior	man,	who	never	loses	his	dignity.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
You	hold	together	with	the	wrong	people.



We	are	 often	 among	people	who	do	not	 belong	 to	 our	 own	 sphere.	 In	 that	 case	we	must	 beware	 of
being	 drawn	 into	 false	 intimacy	 through	 force	 of	 habit.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 this	 would	 have	 evil
consequences.	 Maintaining	 sociability	 without	 intimacy	 is	 the	 only	 right	 attitude	 toward	 such	 people,
because	otherwise	we	should	not	be	free	to	enter	into	relationship	with	people	of	our	own	kind	later	on.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Hold	to	him	outwardly	also.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

Here	the	relations	with	a	man	who	is	the	center	of	union	are	well	established.	Then	we	may,	and	indeed
we	should,	show	our	attachment	openly.	But	we	must	remain	constant	and	not	allow	ourselves	to	be	led
astray.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Manifestation	of	holding	together.
In	the	hunt	the	king	uses	beaters	on	three	sides	only
And	foregoes	game	that	runs	off	in	front.
The	citizens	need	no	warning.
Good	fortune.

In	the	royal	hunts	of	ancient	China	it	was	customary	to	drive	up	the	game	from	three	sides,	but	on	the
fourth	the	animals	had	a	chance	to	run	off.	If	they	failed	to	do	this	they	had	to	pass	through	a	gate	behind
which	the	king	stood	ready	to	shoot.	Only	animals	that	entered	here	were	shot;	those	that	ran	off	in	front
were	permitted	to	escape.	This	custom	accorded	with	a	kingly	attitude;	the	royal	hunter	did	not	wish	to
turn	the	chase	into	a	slaughter,	but	held	that	the	kill	should	consist	only	of	those	animals	which	had	so	to
speak	voluntarily	exposed	themselves.
There	is	depicted	here	a	ruler,	or	 influential	man,	to	whom	people	are	attracted.	Those	who	come	to

him	he	accepts,	those	who	do	not	come	are	allowed	to	go	their	own	way.	He	invites	none,	flatters	none—
all	come	of	their	own	free	will.	In	this	way	there	develops	a	voluntary	dependence	among	those	who	hold
to	him.	They	do	not	have	 to	be	constantly	on	 their	guard	but	may	express	 their	opinions	openly.	Police
measures	are	not	necessary,	 and	 they	 cleave	 to	 their	 ruler	of	 their	 own	volition.	The	 same	principle	of
freedom	 is	 valid	 for	 life	 in	 general.	 We	 should	 not	 woo	 favor	 from	 people.	 If	 a	 man	 cultivates	 within
himself	the	purity	and	the	strength	that	are	necessary	for	one	who	is	the	center	of	a	fellowship,	those	who
are	meant	for	him	come	of	their	own	accord.

Six	at	the	top	means:
He	finds	no	head	for	holding	together.
Misfortune.

The	head	is	the	beginning.	If	the	beginning	is	not	right,	there	is	no	hope	of	a	right	ending.	If	we	have
missed	the	right	moment	for	union	and	go	on	hesitating	to	give	complete	and	full	devotion,	we	shall	regret
the	error	when	it	is	too	late.



9.	Hsiao	Ch’u	/	The	Taming	Power	of	the	Small

This	 hexagram	 means	 the	 force	 of	 the	 small—the	 power	 of	 the	 shadowy—that	 restrains,	 tames,
impedes.	A	weak	line	in	the	fourth	place,	that	of	the	minister,1	holds	the	five	strong	lines	in	check.	In	the
Image	 it	 is	 the	 wind	 blowing	 across	 the	 sky.	 The	 wind	 restrains	 the	 clouds,	 the	 rising	 breath	 of	 the
Creative,	and	makes	them	grow	dense,	but	as	yet	is	not	strong	enough	to	turn	them	to	rain.	The	hexagram
presents	 a	 configuration	 of	 circumstances	 in	which	 a	 strong	 element	 is	 temporarily	 held	 in	 leash	 by	 a
weak	element.	It	is	only	through	gentleness	that	this	can	have	a	successful	outcome.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL
Has	success.
Dense	clouds,	no	rain	from	our	western	region.

This	image	refers	to	the	state	of	affairs	in	China	at	the	time	when	King	Wên,	who	came	originally	from
the	west,	was	in	the	east	at	the	court	of	the	reigning	tyrant	Chou	Hsin.	The	moment	for	action	on	a	large
scale	had	not	yet	arrived.	King	Wên	could	only	keep	the	tyrant	somewhat	in	check	by	friendly	persuasion.
Hence	 the	 image	of	many	clouds,	promising	moisture	and	blessing	 to	 the	 land,	although	as	yet	no	rain
falls.	The	situation	is	not	unfavorable;	there	is	a	prospect	of	ultimate	success,	but	there	are	still	obstacles
in	 the	 way,	 and	 we	 can	 merely	 take	 preparatory	 measures.	 Only	 through	 the	 small	 means	 of	 friendly
persuasion	can	we	exert	any	influence.	The	time	has	not	yet	come	for	sweeping	measures.	However,	we
may	be	able,	to	a	limited	extent,	to	act	as	a	restraining	and	subduing	influence.	To	carry	out	our	purpose
we	need	firm	determination	within	and	gentleness	and	adaptability	in	external	relations.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	drives	across	heaven:
The	image	of	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL.
Thus	the	superior	man
Refines	the	outward	aspect	of	his	nature.

The	wind	can	indeed	drive	the	clouds	together	in	the	sky;	yet,	being	nothing	but	air,	without	solid	body,
it	does	not	produce	great	or	lasting	effects.	So	also	an	individual,	in	times	when	he	can	produce	no	great
effect	in	the	outer	world,	can	do	nothing	except	refine	the	expression	of	his	nature	in	small	ways.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Return	to	the	way.
How	could	there	be	blame	in	this?
Good	fortune.

It	 lies	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 a	 strong	 man	 to	 press	 forward.	 In	 so	 doing	 he	 encounters	 obstructions.
Therefore	he	returns	to	the	way	suited	to	his	situation,	where	he	is	free	to	advance	or	to	retreat.	In	the
nature	of	things	this	will	bring	good	fortune,	for	it	is	wise	and	reasonable	not	to	try	to	obtain	anything	by
force.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
He	allows	himself	to	be	drawn	into	returning.
Good	fortune.

One	would	 like	 to	press	 forward,	 but	before	going	 farther	 one	 sees	 from	 the	example	of	 others	 like
oneself	that	this	way	is	blocked.	In	such	a	case,	if	the	effort	to	push	forward	is	not	in	harmony	with	the
time,2	a	reasonable	and	resolute	man	will	not	expose	himself	 to	a	personal	 rebuff,	but	will	 retreat	with
others	of	like	mind.	This	brings	good	fortune,	because	he	does	not	needlessly	jeopardize	himself.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	spokes	burst	out	of	the	wagon	wheels.
Man	and	wife	roll	their	eyes.

Here	an	attempt	is	made	to	press	forward	forcibly,	in	the	consciousness	that	the	obstructing	power	is
slight.	 But	 since,	 under	 the	 circumstances,	 power	 actually	 lies	with	 the	weak,	 this	 sudden	 offensive	 is
doomed	 to	 failure.	 External	 conditions	 hinder	 the	 advance,	 just	 as	 loss	 of	 the	 wheel	 spokes	 stops	 the
progress	of	a	wagon.	We	do	not	yet	heed	 this	hint	 from	 fate,	hence	 there	are	annoying	arguments	 like
those	of	a	married	couple.	Naturally	this	is	not	a	favorable	state	of	things,	for	though	the	situation	may
enable	the	weaker	side	to	hold	its	ground,	the	difficulties	are	too	numerous	to	permit	of	a	happy	result.	In
consequence	even	the	strong	man	cannot	so	use	his	power	as	to	exert	the	right	influence	on	those	around
him.	He	experiences	a	rebuff	where	he	expected	an	easy	victory,	and	he	thus	compromises	his	dignity.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
If	you	are	sincere,	blood	vanishes	and	fear	gives	way.
No	blame.

If	one	is	 in	the	difficult	and	responsible	position	of	counselor	to	a	powerful	man,	one	should	restrain
him	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 right	 may	 prevail.	 Therein	 lies	 a	 danger	 so	 great	 that	 the	 threat	 of	 actual
bloodshed	may	arise.	Nonetheless,	the	power	of	disinterested	truth	is	greater	than	all	these	obstacles.	It
carries	such	weight	that	the	end	is	achieved,	and	all	danger	of	bloodshed	and	all	fear	disappear.



Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
If	you	are	sincere	and	loyally	attached,
You	are	rich	in	your	neighbor.

Loyalty	 leads	 to	 firm	 ties	because	 it	means	 that	each	partner	complements	 the	other.	 In	 the	weaker
person	loyalty	consists	in	devotion,	in	the	stronger	it	consists	in	trustworthiness.	This	relation	of	mutual
reinforcement	leads	to	a	true	wealth	that	is	all	the	more	apparent	because	it	is	not	selfishly	hoarded	but	is
shared	with	friends.	Pleasure	shared	is	pleasure	doubled.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	rain	comes,	there	is	rest.
This	is	due	to	the	lasting	effect	of	character.
Perseverance	brings	the	woman	into	danger.
The	moon	is	nearly	full.
If	the	superior	man	persists,
Misfortune	comes.

Success	 is	at	hand.	The	wind	has	driven	up	 the	 rain.	A	 fixed	standpoint	has	been	 reached.	This	has
come	about	through	the	accumulation	of	small	effects	produced	by	reverence	for	a	superior	character.	But
a	success	thus	secured	bit	by	bit	calls	 for	great	caution.	 It	would	be	a	dangerous	 illusion	for	anyone	to
think	he	could	presume	upon	it.	The	female	principle,	the	weak	element	that	has	won	the	victory,	should
never	persist	in	vaunting	it—that	would	lead	to	danger.	The	dark	power	in	the	moon	is	strongest	when	the
moon	 is	 almost	 full.	When	 it	 is	 full	 and	 directly	 opposite	 the	 sun,	 its	waning	 is	 inevitable.	Under	 such
circumstances	 one	must	 be	 content	 with	 what	 has	 been	 achieved.	 To	 advance	 any	 further,	 before	 the
appropriate	time	has	come,	would	lead	to	misfortune.



10.	Lü	/	Treading	[Conduct]

The	name	of	the	hexagram	means	on	the	one	hand	the	right	way	of	conducting	oneself.	Heaven,	the
father,	 is	above,	and	the	 lake,	 the	youngest	daughter,	 is	below.	This	shows	the	difference	between	high
and	 low,	upon	which	 composure,	 correct	 social	 conduct,	 depends.	On	 the	other	hand,	 the	word	 for	 the
name	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 TREADING,1	 means	 literally	 treading	 upon	 something.	 The	 small	 and	 cheerful
[Tui]	treads	upon	the	large	and	strong	[Ch’ien].	The	direction	of	movement	of	the	two	primary	trigrams	is
upward.	The	fact	that	the	strong	treads	on	the	weak	is	not	mentioned	in	the	Book	of	Changes,	because	it
is	 taken	for	granted.	For	the	weak	to	take	a	stand	against	 the	strong	 is	not	dangerous	here,	because	 it
happens	in	good	humor	[Tui]	and	without	presumption,	so	that	the	strong	man	is	not	irritated	but	takes	it
all	in	good	part.

THE	JUDGMENT
TREADING.	Treading	upon	the	tail	of	the	tiger.
It	does	not	bite	the	man.	Success.

The	situation	is	really	difficult.	That	which	is	strongest	and	that	which	is	weakest	are	close	together.
The	weak	follows	behind	the	strong	and	worries	it.	The	strong,	however,	acquiesces	and	does	not	hurt	the
weak,	because	the	contact	is	in	good	humor	and	harmless.

In	terms	of	a	human	situation,	one	is	handling	wild,	 intractable	people.	In	such	a	case	one’s	purpose
will	be	achieved	if	one	behaves	with	decorum.	Pleasant	manners	succeed	even	with	irritable	people.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	above,	the	lake	below:
The	image	of	TREADING.
Thus	the	superior	man	discriminates	between	high	and	low,
And	thereby	fortifies	the	thinking	of	the	people.

Heaven	and	the	 lake	show	a	difference	of	elevation	that	 inheres	 in	 the	natures	of	 the	two,	hence	no
envy	arises.	Among	mankind	also	there	are	necessarily	differences	of	elevation;	it	is	impossible	to	bring
about	universal	 equality.	But	 it	 is	 important	 that	differences	 in	 social	 rank	 should	not	be	arbitrary	and
unjust,	for	if	this	occurs,	envy	and	class	struggle	are	the	inevitable	consequences.	If,	on	the	other	band,
external	 differences	 in	 rank	 correspond	 with	 differences	 in	 inner	 worth,	 and	 if	 inner	 worth	 forms	 the
criterion	of	external	rank,	people	acquiesce	and	order	reigns	in	society.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Simple	conduct.	Progress	without	blame.

The	 situation	 is	 one	 in	which	we	 are	 still	 not	 bound	 by	 any	 obligations	 of	 social	 intercourse.	 If	 our
conduct	 is	 simple,	 we	 remain	 free	 of	 them.	We	 can	 quietly	 follow	 our	 predilections	 as	 long	 as	we	 are
content	and	make	no	demands	on	people.

The	 meaning	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 not	 standstill	 but	 progress.	 A	 man	 finds	 himself	 in	 an	 altogether
inferior	position	at	the	start.	However,	he	has	the	inner	strength	that	guarantees	progress.	If	he	can	be
content	with	 simplicity,	 he	 can	make	 progress	without	 blame.	When	 a	man	 is	 dissatisfied	with	modest
circumstances,	 he	 is	 restless	 and	 ambitious	 and	 tries	 to	 advance,	 not	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 accomplishing
anything	worth	while,	but	merely	 in	order	 to	escape	 from	 lowliness	and	poverty	by	dint	of	his	conduct.
Once	 his	 purpose	 is	 achieved,	 he	 is	 certain	 to	 become	 arrogant	 and	 luxury-loving.	 Therefore	 blame
attaches	to	his	progress.	On	the	other	hand,	a	man	who	is	good	at	his	work	is	content	to	behave	simply.
He	 wishes	 to	 make	 progress	 in	 order	 to	 accomplish	 something.	 When	 he	 attains	 his	 goal,	 he	 does
something	worthwhile,	and	all	is	well.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Treading	a	smooth,	level	course.
The	perseverance	of	a	dark	man2
Brings	good	fortune.

The	situation	of	a	 lonely	sage	 is	 indicated	here.	He	remains	withdrawn	from	the	bustle	of	 life,	seeks
nothing,	asks	nothing	of	anyone,	and	 is	not	dazzled	by	enticing	goals.	He	 is	 true	 to	himself	and	 travels
through	life	unassailed,	on	a	level	road.	Since	he	is	content	and	does	not	challenge	fate,	he	remains	free
of	entanglements.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
A	one-eyed	man	is	able	to	see,
A	lame	man	is	able	to	tread.
He	treads	on	the	tail	of	the	tiger.
The	tiger	bites	the	man.
Misfortune.
Thus	does	a	warrior	act	on	behalf	of	his	great	prince.

A	one-eyed	man	can	indeed	see,	but	not	enough	for	clear	vision.	A	lame	man	can	indeed	tread,	but	not
enough	 to	make	progress.	 If	 in	 spite	 of	 such	defects	 a	man	 considers	himself	 strong	and	 consequently
exposes	himself	 to	danger,	he	 is	 inviting	disaster,	 for	he	 is	undertaking	something	beyond	his	strength.
This	reckless	way	of	plunging	ahead,	regardless	of	the	adequacy	of	one’s	powers,	can	be	justified	only	in



the	case	of	a	warrior	battling	for	his	prince.
Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	treads	on	the	tail	of	the	tiger.
Caution	and	circumspection
Lead	ultimately	to	good	fortune.

This	text	refers	to	a	dangerous	enterprise.	The	inner	power	to	carry	it	through	is	there,	but	this	inner
power	 is	 combined	 with	 hesitating	 caution	 in	 one’s	 external	 attitude.	 This	 line	 contrasts	 with	 the
preceding	line,	which	is	weak	within	but	outwardly	presses	forward.	Here	one	is	sure	of	ultimate	success,
which	consists	in	achieving	one’s	purpose,	that	is,	in	overcoming	danger	by	going	forward.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Resolute	conduct.
Perseverance	with	awareness	of	danger.

This	refers	to	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.	One	sees	that	one	has	to	be	resolute	in	conduct.
But	 at	 the	 same	 time	 one	 must	 remain	 conscious	 of	 the	 danger	 connected	 with	 such	 resoluteness,
especially	if	it	is	to	be	persevered	in.	Only	awareness	of	the	danger	makes	success	possible.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Look	to	your	conduct	and	weigh	the	favorable	signs.
When	everything	is	fulfilled,	supreme	good	fortune	comes.

The	work	is	ended.	If	we	want	to	know	whether	good	fortune	will	follow,	we	must	look	back	upon	our
conduct	and	its	consequences.	If	the	effects	are	good,	then	good	fortune	is	certain.	No	one	knows	himself.
It	is	only	by	the	consequences	of	his	actions,	by	the	fruit	of	his	labors,	that	a	man	can	judge	what	he	is	to
expect.



11.	T’ai	/	Peace

The	Receptive,	which	moves	 downward,	 stands	 above;	 the	Creative,	which	moves	 upward,	 is	 below.
Hence	 their	 influences	 meet	 and	 are	 in	 harmony,	 so	 that	 all	 living	 things	 bloom	 and	 prosper.	 This
hexagram	belongs	 to	 the	 first	month	 (February–March),	at	which	 time	 the	 forces	of	nature	prepare	 the
new	spring.

THE	JUDGMENT
PEACE.	The	small	departs,
The	great	approaches.
Good	fortune.	Success.

This	hexagram	denotes	a	time	in	nature	when	heaven	seems	to	be	on	earth.	Heaven	has	placed	itself
beneath	the	earth,	and	so	their	powers	unite	in	deep	harmony.	Then	peace	and	blessing	descend	upon	all
living	things.

In	the	world	of	man	it	is	a	time	of	social	harmony;	those	in	high	places	show	favor	to	the	lowly,	and	the
lowly	and	inferior	in	their	turn	are	well	disposed	toward	the	highly	placed.	There	is	an	end	to	all	feuds.

Inside,	at	the	center,	in	the	key	position,	is	the	light	principle;	the	dark	principle	is	outside.	Thus	the
light	has	a	powerful	influence,	while	the	dark	is	submissive.	In	this	way	each	receives	its	due.	When	the
good	elements	of	society	occupy	a	central	position	and	are	in	control,	the	evil	elements	come	under	their
influence	and	change	for	the	better.	When	the	spirit	of	heaven	rules	in	man,	his	animal	nature	also	comes
under	its	influence	and	takes	its	appropriate	place.

The	individual	lines	enter	the	hexagram	from	below	and	leave	it	again	at	the	top.	Here	the	small,	weak,
and	 evil	 elements	 are	 about	 to	 take	 their	 departure,	 while	 the	 great,	 strong,	 and	 good	 elements	 are
moving	up.	This	brings	good	fortune	and	success.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	and	earth	unite:	the	image	of	PEACE.
Thus	the	ruler
Divides	and	completes	the	course	of	heaven	and	earth;
He	furthers	and	regulates	the	gifts	of	heaven	and	earth,
And	so	aids	the	people.

Heaven	and	earth	are	in	contact	and	combine	their	influences,	producing	a	time	of	universal	flowering
and	prosperity.	This	stream	of	energy	must	be	regulated	by	the	ruler	of	men.	It	 is	done	by	a	process	of
division.	Thus	men	divide	the	uniform	flow	of	time	into	the	seasons,	according	to	the	succession	of	natural
phenomena,	 and	 mark	 off	 infinite	 space	 by	 the	 points	 of	 the	 compass.	 In	 this	 way	 nature	 in	 its
overwhelming	 profusion	 of	 phenomena	 is	 bounded	 and	 controlled.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 nature	must	 be
furthered	 in	her	productiveness.	This	 is	done	by	adjusting	 the	products	 to	 the	 right	 time	and	 the	 right
place,	which	increases	the	natural	yield.	This	controlling	and	furthering	activity	of	man	in	his	relation	to
nature	is	the	work	on	nature	that	rewards	him.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
When	ribbon	grass	is	pulled	up,	the	sod	comes	with	it.
Each	according	to	his	kind.
Undertakings	bring	good	fortune.

In	times	of	prosperity	every	able	man	called	to	fill	an	office	draws	like-minded	people	along	with	him,
just	as	in	pulling	up	ribbon	grass	one	always	pulls	up	a	bunch	of	it,	because	the	stalks	are	connected	by
their	roots.	In	such	times,	when	it	is	possible	to	extend	influence	widely,	the	mind	of	an	able	man	is	set
upon	going	out	into	life	and	accomplishing	something.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Bearing	with	the	uncultured	in	gentleness,
Fording	the	river	with	resolution,
Not	neglecting	what	is	distant,
Not	regarding	one’s	companions:
Thus	one	may	manage	to	walk	in	the	middle.

In	 times	 of	 prosperity	 it	 is	 important	 above	 all	 to	 possess	 enough	 greatness	 of	 soul	 to	 bear	 with
imperfect	 people.	 For	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 great	master	 no	material	 is	 unproductive;	 he	 can	 find	 use	 for
everything.	 But	 this	 generosity	 is	 by	 no	 means	 laxity	 or	 weakness.	 It	 is	 during	 times	 of	 prosperity
especially	that	we	must	always	be	ready	to	risk	even	dangerous	undertakings,	such	as	the	crossing	of	a
river,	 if	 they	are	necessary.	So	too	we	must	not	neglect	what	 is	distant	but	must	attend	scrupulously	to
everything.	Factionalism	and	the	dominance	of	cliques	are	especially	to	be	avoided.	Even	if	people	of	like
mind	come	forward	together,	they	ought	not	to	form	a	faction	by	holding	together	for	mutual	advantage;
instead,	each	man	should	do	his	duty.	These	are	four	ways	in	which	one	can	overcome	the	hidden	danger
of	a	gradual	slackening	that	always	lurks	in	any	time	of	peace.	And	that	is	how	one	finds	the	middle	way
for	action.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
No	plain	not	followed	by	a	slope.



No	going	not	followed	by	a	return.
He	who	remains	persevering	in	danger
Is	without	blame.
Do	not	complain	about	this	truth;
Enjoy	the	good	fortune	you	still	possess.

Everything	on	earth	is	subject	to	change.	Prosperity	is	followed	by	decline:	this	 is	the	eternal	 law	on
earth.	Evil	can	indeed	be	held	in	check	but	not	permanently	abolished.	It	always	returns.	This	conviction
might	induce	melancholy,	but	it	should	not;	it	ought	only	to	keep	us	from	falling	into	illusion	when	good
fortune	comes	to	us.	If	we	continue	mindful	of	the	danger,	we	remain	persevering	and	make	no	mistakes.
As	long	as	a	man’s	inner	nature	remains	stronger	and	richer	than	anything	offered	by	external	fortune,	as
long	as	he	remains	inwardly	superior	to	fate,	fortune	will	not	desert	him.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	flutters	down,	not	boasting	of	his	wealth,
Together	with	his	neighbor,
Guileless	and	sincere.

In	times	of	mutual	confidence,	people	of	high	rank	come	in	close	contact	with	the	lowly	quite	simply
and	without	boasting	of	their	wealth.	This	is	not	due	to	the	force	of	circumstances	but	corresponds	with
their	 inmost	 sentiment.	 The	 approach	 is	 made	 quite	 spontaneously,	 because	 it	 is	 based	 on	 inner
conviction.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	sovereign	I
Gives	his	daughter	in	marriage.
This	brings	blessing
And	supreme	good	fortune.

The	sovereign	I	is	T’ang	the	Completer.1	By	his	decree	the	imperial	princesses,	although	higher	in	rank
than	their	husbands,	had	to	obey	them	like	all	other	wives.	Here	too	we	are	shown	a	truly	modest	union	of
high	and	low	that	brings	happiness	and	blessings.

Six	at	the	top	means:
The	wall	falls	back	into	the	moat.
Use	no	army	now.
Make	your	commands	known	within	your	own	town.
Perseverance	brings	humiliation.

The	change	alluded	to	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	hexagram	has	begun	to	 take	place.	The	wall	of	 the	 town
sinks	back	into	the	moat	from	which	it	was	dug.	The	hour	of	doom	is	at	hand.	When	matters	have	come	to
this	pass,	we	should	submit	to	fate	and	not	try	to	stave	it	off	by	violent	resistance.	The	one	recourse	left	us
is	to	hold	our	own	within	our	intimate	circle.	Should	we	persevere	in	trying	to	resist	the	evil	in	the	usual
way,	our	collapse	would	only	be	more	complete,	and	humiliation	would	be	the	result.



12.	P’i	/	Standstill	[Stagnation]

This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 preceding	 one.	 Heaven	 is	 above,	 drawing	 farther	 and	 farther
away,	while	the	earth	below	sinks	farther	into	the	depths.	The	creative	powers	are	not	in	relation.	It	is	a
time	of	standstill	and	decline.	This	hexagram	is	linked	with	the	seventh	month	(August–September),	when
the	year	has	passed	its	zenith	and	autumnal	decay	is	setting	in.

THE	JUDGMENT
STANDSTILL.	Evil	people	do	not	further
The	perseverance	of	the	superior	man.
The	great	departs;	the	small	approaches.

Heaven	and	earth	are	out	of	communion	and	all	things	are	benumbed.	What	is	above	has	no	relation	to
what	is	below,	and	on	earth	confusion	and	disorder	prevail.	The	dark	power	is	within,	the	light	power	is
without.	Weakness	is	within,	harshness	without.	Within	are	the	inferior,	and	without	are	the	superior.	The
way	of	inferior	people	is	in	ascent;	the	way	of	superior	people	is	on	the	decline.	But	the	superior	people	do
not	allow	themselves	to	be	turned	from	their	principles.	If	the	possibility	of	exerting	influence	is	closed	to
them,	they	nevertheless	remain	faithful	to	their	principles	and	withdraw	into	seclusion.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	and	earth	do	not	unite:
The	image	of	STANDSTILL.
Thus	the	superior	man	falls	back	upon	his	inner	worth
In	order	to	escape	the	difficulties.
He	does	not	permit	himself	to	be	honored	with	revenue.

When,	owing	to	the	influence	of	inferior	men,	mutual	mistrust	prevails	in	public	life,	fruitful	activity	is
rendered	 impossible,	 because	 the	 fundaments	 are	 wrong.	 Therefore	 the	 superior	 man	 knows	 what	 he
must	do	under	such	circumstances;	he	does	not	allow	himself	to	be	tempted	by	dazzling	offers	to	take	part
in	public	activities.	This	would	only	expose	him	to	danger,	since	he	cannot	assent	to	the	meanness	of	the
others.	He	therefore	hides	his	worth	and	withdraws	into	seclusion.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
When	ribbon	grass	is	pulled	up,	the	sod	comes	with	it.
Each	according	to	his	kind.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune	and	success.

The	 text	 is	almost	 the	 same	as	 that	of	 the	 first	 line	of	 the	preceding	hexagram,	but	with	a	contrary
meaning.	In	the	latter	a	man	is	drawing	another	along	with	him	on	the	road	to	an	official	career;	here	a
man	 is	 drawing	 another	 with	 him	 into	 retirement	 from	 public	 life.	 This	 is	 why	 the	 text	 says	 here,
“Perseverance	 brings	 good	 fortune	 and	 success,”	 and	 not	 “Undertakings	 bring	 good	 fortune.”	 If	 it
becomes	 impossible	 to	 make	 our	 influence	 count,	 it	 is	 only	 by	 retirement	 that	 we	 spare	 ourselves
humiliation.	Success	in	a	higher	sense	can	be	ours,	because	we	know	how	to	safeguard	the	value	of	our
personalities.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
They	bear	and	endure;
This	means	good	fortune	for	inferior	people.
The	standstill	serves	to	help	the	great	man	to	attain	success.

Inferior	people	are	ready	to	flatter	their	superiors	in	a	servile	way.	They	would	also	endure	the	superior
man	if	he	would	put	an	end	to	their	confusion.	This	is	fortunate	for	them.	But	the	great	man	calmly	bears
the	consequences	of	the	standstill.	He	does	not	mingle	with	the	crowd	of	the	inferior;	that	is	not	his	place.
By	his	willingness	to	suffer	personally	he	insures	the	success	of	his	fundamental	principles.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
They	bear	shame.

Inferior	people	who	have	risen	to	power	illegitimately	do	not	feel	equal	to	the	responsibility	they	have
taken	upon	 themselves.	 In	 their	hearts	 they	begin	 to	be	ashamed,	although	at	 first	 they	do	not	show	 it
outwardly.	This	marks	a	turn	for	the	better.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	who	acts	at	the	command	of	the	highest
Remains	without	blame.
Those	of	like	mind	partake	of	the	blessing.

The	time	of	standstill	is	nearing	the	point	of	change	into	its	opposite.	Whoever	wishes	to	restore	order
must	 feel	 himself	 called	 to	 the	 task	 and	 have	 the	 necessary	 authority.	 A	 man	 who	 sets	 himself	 up	 as
capable	of	creating	order	according	to	his	own	judgment	could	make	mistakes	and	end	in	failure.	But	the
man	who	is	truly	called	to	the	task	is	favored	by	the	conditions	of	the	time,	and	all	those	of	like	mind	will
share	in	his	blessing.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Standstill	is	giving	way.
Good	fortune	for	the	great	man.



“What	if	it	should	fail,	what	if	it	should	fail?”
In	this	way	he	ties	it	to	a	cluster	of	mulberry	shoots.

The	time	undergoes	a	change.	The	right	man,	able	to	restore	order,	has	arrived.	Hence	“Good	fortune.”
But	such	periods	of	transition	are	the	very	times	in	which	we	must	fear	and	tremble.	Success	is	assured
only	through	greatest	caution,	which	asks	always,	“What	if	 it	should	fail?”	When	a	mulberry	bush	is	cut
down,	a	number	of	unusually	strong	shoots	sprout	from	the	roots.	Hence	the	image	of	tying	something	to
a	cluster	of	mulberry	shoots	is	used	to	symbolize	the	way	of	making	success	certain.	Confucius	says	about
this	line:	“Danger	arises	when	a	man	feels	secure	in	his	position.	Destruction	threatens	when	a	man	seeks
to	preserve	his	worldly	estate.	Confusion	develops	when	a	man	has	put	everything	in	order.	Therefore	the
superior	man	does	not	forget	danger	in	his	security,	nor	ruin	when	he	is	well	established,	nor	confusion
when	his	affairs	are	in	order.	In	this	way	he	gains	personal	safety	and	is	able	to	protect	the	empire.”

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	standstill	comes	to	an	end.
First	standstill,	then	good	fortune.

The	 standstill	 does	 not	 last	 forever.	However,	 it	 does	 not	 cease	 of	 its	 own	 accord;	 the	 right	man	 is
needed	 to	end	 it.	This	 is	 the	difference	between	a	state	of	peace	and	a	state	of	 stagnation.	Continuous
effort	is	necessary	to	maintain	peace:	left	to	itself	it	would	change	into	stagnation	and	disintegration.	The
time	 of	 disintegration,	 however,	 does	 not	 change	 back	 automatically	 to	 a	 condition	 of	 peace	 and
prosperity;	effort	must	be	put	forth	in	order	to	end	it.	This	shows	the	creative	attitude	that	man	must	take
if	the	world	is	to	be	put	in	order.



13.	T’ung	Jên	/	Fellowship	with	Men

The	image	of	the	upper	trigram	Ch’ien	is	heaven,	and	that	of	the	lower,	Li,	is	flame.	It	is	the	nature	of
fire	 to	 flame	up	 to	heaven.	This	 gives	 the	 idea	 of	 fellowship.	 It	 is	 the	 second	 line	 that,	 by	 virtue	 of	 its
central	character,	unites	the	five	strong	lines	around	it.	This	hexagram	forms	a	complement	to	Shih,	THE
ARMY	(7).	In	the	latter,	danger	is	within	and	obedience	without—the	character	of	a	warlike	army,	which,
in	order	to	hold	together,	needs	one	strong	man	among	the	many	who	are	weak.	Here,	clarity	 is	within
and	strength	without—the	character	of	a	peaceful	union	of	men,	which,	in	order	to	hold	together,	needs
one	yielding	nature	among	many	firm	persons.

THE	JUDGMENT
FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN	in	the	open.
Success.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
The	perseverance	of	the	superior	man	furthers.

True	 fellowship	 among	 men	 must	 be	 based	 upon	 a	 concern	 that	 is	 universal.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 private
interests	 of	 the	 individual	 that	 create	 lasting	 fellowship	 among	men,	 but	 rather	 the	 goals	 of	 humanity.
That	 is	why	 it	 is	said	that	 fellowship	with	men	in	the	open	succeeds.	 If	unity	of	 this	kind	prevails,	even
difficult	and	dangerous	tasks,	such	as	crossing	the	great	water,	can	be	accomplished.	But	in	order	to	bring
about	 this	 sort	 of	 fellowship,	 a	 persevering	 and	 enlightened	 leader	 is	 needed—a	 man	 with	 clear,
convincing,	and	inspiring	aims	and	the	strength	to	carry	them	out.	(The	inner	trigram	means	clarity;	the
outer,	strength.)

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	together	with	fire:
The	image	of	FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN.
Thus	the	superior	man	organizes	the	clans
And	makes	distinctions	between	things.

Heaven	has	the	same	direction	of	movement	as	fire,	yet	it	is	different	from	fire.	Just	as	the	luminaries
in	the	sky	serve	for	the	systematic	division	and	arrangement	of	time,	so	human	society	and	all	things	that
really	 belong	 together	 must	 be	 organically	 arranged.	 Fellowship	 should	 not	 be	 a	 mere	 mingling	 of
individuals	or	of	things—that	would	be	chaos,	not	fellowship.	If	fellowship	is	to	lead	to	order,	there	must
be	organization	within	diversity.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Fellowship	with	men	at	the	gate.
No	blame.

The	beginning	of	union	among	people	should	take	place	before	the	door.	All	are	equally	close	to	one
another.	No	divergent	aims	have	yet	arisen,	and	one	makes	no	mistakes.	The	basic	principles	of	any	kind
of	union	must	be	equally	accessible	to	all	concerned.	Secret	agreements	bring	misfortune.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Fellowship	with	men	in	the	clan.
Humiliation.

There	is	danger	here	of	formation	of	a	separate	faction	on	the	basis	of	personal	and	egotistic	interests.
Such	factions,	which	are	exclusive	and,	instead	of	welcoming	all	men,	must	condemn	one	group	in	order
to	unite	the	others,	originate	from	low	motives	and	therefore	lead	in	the	course	of	time	to	humiliation.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
He	hides	weapons	in	the	thicket;
He	climbs	the	high	hill	in	front	of	it.
For	three	years	he	does	not	rise	up.

Here	fellowship	has	changed	about	to	mistrust.	Each	man	distrusts	the	other,	plans	a	secret	ambush,
and	 seeks	 to	 spy	 on	his	 fellow	 from	afar.	We	 are	 dealing	with	 an	 obstinate	 opponent	whom	we	 cannot
come	at	by	this	method.	Obstacles	standing	in	the	way	of	fellowship	with	others	are	shown	here.	One	has
mental	reservations	for	one’s	own	part	and	seeks	to	take	his	opponent	by	surprise.	This	very	fact	makes
one	mistrustful,	suspecting	the	same	wiles	in	his	opponent	and	trying	to	ferret	them	out.	The	result	is	that
one	 departs	 further	 and	 further	 from	 true	 fellowship.	 The	 longer	 this	 goes	 on,	 the	more	 alienated	 one
becomes.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	climbs	up	on	his	wall;	he	cannot	attack.
Good	fortune.

Here	the	reconciliation	that	follows	quarrel	moves	nearer.	It	is	true	that	there	are	still	dividing	walls	on
which	we	stand	confronting	one	another.	But	 the	difficulties	are	 too	great.	We	get	 into	straits,	and	 this
brings	us	to	our	senses.	We	cannot	fight,	and	therein	lies	our	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Men	bound	in	fellowship	first	weep	and	lament,



But	afterward	they	laugh.
After	great	struggles	they	succeed	in	meeting.

Two	people	are	outwardly	separated,	but	in	their	hearts	they	are	united.	They	are	kept	apart	by	their
positions	 in	 life.	 Many	 difficulties	 and	 obstructions	 arise	 between	 them	 and	 cause	 them	 grief.	 But,
remaining	true	to	each	other,	 they	allow	nothing	to	separate	them,	and	although	it	costs	them	a	severe
struggle	to	overcome	the	obstacles,	they	will	succeed.	When	they	come	together	their	sadness	will	change
to	joy.	Confucius	says	of	this:
“Life	leads	the	thoughtful	man	on	a	path	of	many	windings.
Now	the	course	is	checked,	now	it	runs	straight	again.
Here	winged	thoughts	may	pour	freely	forth	in	words,
There	the	heavy	burden	of	knowledge	must	be	shut	away	in	silence.
But	when	two	people	are	at	one	in	their	inmost	hearts,
They	shatter	even	the	strength	of	iron	or	of	bronze.
And	when	two	people	understand	each	other	in	their	inmost	hearts,
Their	words	are	sweet	and	strong,	like	the	fragrance	of	orchids.”

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Fellowship	with	men	in	the	meadow.
No	remorse.

The	warm	attachment	that	springs	from	the	heart	is	lacking	here.	We	are	by	this	time	actually	outside
of	fellowship	with	others.	However,	we	ally	ourselves	with	them.	The	fellowship	does	not	include	all,	but
only	those	who	happen	to	dwell	near	one	another.	The	meadow	is	the	pasture	at	the	entrance	to	the	town.
At	 this	 stage,	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 of	 the	 union	 of	 mankind	 has	 not	 yet	 been	 attained,	 but	 we	 need	 not
reproach	ourselves.	We	join	the	community	without	separate	aims	of	our	own.



14.	Ta	Yu	/	Posession	in	Great	Measure

The	 fire	 in	 heaven	 above	 shines	 far,	 and	 all	 things	 stand	 out	 in	 the	 light	 and	become	manifest.	 The
weak	fifth	line	occupies	the	place	of	honor,	and	all	the	strong	lines	are	in	accord	with	it.	All	things	come	to
the	man	who	is	modest	and	kind	in	a	high	position.1

THE	JUDGMENT
POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE.
Supreme	success.

The	two	trigrams	indicate	that	strength	and	clarity	unite.	Possession	in	great	measure	is	determined	by
fate	and	accords	with	the	time.	How	is	it	possible	that	the	weak	line	has	power	to	hold	the	strong	lines
fast	 and	 to	 possess	 them?	 It	 is	 done	 by	 virtue	 of	 unselfish	 modesty.	 The	 time	 is	 favorable—a	 time	 of
strength	within,	clarity	and	culture	without.	Power	 is	expressing	 itself	 in	a	graceful	and	controlled	way.
This	brings	supreme	success	and	wealth.2

THE	IMAGE
Fire	in	heaven	above:
The	image	of	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT
MEASURE.
Thus	the	superior	man	curbs	evil	and	furthers	good,
And	thereby	obeys	the	benevolent	will	of	heaven.

The	 sun	 in	 heaven	 above,	 shedding	 light	 over	 everything	 on	 earth,	 is	 the	 image	 of	 possession	 on	 a
grand	scale.	But	a	possession	of	 this	 sort	must	be	administered	properly.	The	 sun	brings	both	evil	 and
good	into	the	light	of	day.	Man	must	combat	and	curb	the	evil,	and	must	favor	and	promote	the	good.	Only
in	this	way	does	he	fulfill	the	benevolent	will	of	God,	who	desires	only	good	and	not	evil.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
No	relationship	with	what	is	harmful;
There	is	no	blame	in	this.
If	one	remains	conscious	of	difficulty,
One	remains	without	blame.

Great	possession	that	is	still	 in	its	beginnings	and	that	has	not	yet	been	challenged	brings	no	blame,
since	there	has	been	no	opportunity	to	make	mistakes.	Yet	there	are	many	difficulties	to	be	overcome.	It	is
only	by	 remaining	conscious	of	 these	difficulties	 that	one	can	keep	 inwardly	 free	of	possible	arrogance
and	wastefulness,	and	thus	in	principle	overcome	all	cause	for	blame.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
A	big	wagon	for	loading.
One	may	undertake	something.
No	blame.

Great	possession	consists	not	only	in	the	quantity	of	goods	at	one’s	disposal,	but,	first	and	foremost,	in
their	mobility	and	utility,	for	then	they	can	be	used	in	undertakings,	and	we	remain	free	of	embarrassment
and	mistakes.	The	big	wagon,	which	will	carry	a	heavy	load	and	in	which	one	can	journey	far,	means	that
there	are	 at	 hand	able	helpers	who	give	 their	 support	 and	are	 equal	 to	 their	 task.	One	 can	 load	great
responsibility	upon	such	persons,	and	this	is	necessary	in	important	undertakings.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
A	prince	offers	it	to	the	Son	of	Heaven.
A	petty	man	cannot	do	this.

A	magnanimous,	 liberal-minded	man	 should	 not	 regard	what	 he	 possesses	 as	 his	 exclusive	 personal
property,	but	should	place	it	at	the	disposal	of	the	ruler	or	of	the	people	at	large.	In	so	doing,	he	takes	the
right	 attitude	 toward	 his	 possession,	 which	 as	 private	 property	 can	 never	 endure.	 A	 petty	 man	 is
incapable	of	this.	He	is	harmed	by	great	possessions,	because	instead	of	sacrificing	them,	he	would	keep
them	for	himself.3

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	makes	a	difference
Between	himself	and	his	neighbor.
No	blame.

This	characterizes	the	position	of	a	man	placed	among	rich	and	powerful	neighbors.	It	is	a	dangerous
position.	He	must	look	neither	to	the	right	nor	to	the	left,	and	must	shun	envy	and	the	temptation	to	vie
with	others.	In	this	way	he	remains	free	of	mistakes.4

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
He	whose	truth	is	accessible,	yet	dignified,
Has	good	fortune.

The	situation	 is	very	 favorable.	People	are	being	won	not	by	coercion	but	by	unaffected	sincerity,	 so
that	they	are	attached	to	us	in	sincerity	and	truth.	However,	benevolence	alone	is	not	sufficient	at	the	time
of	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE.	For	 insolence	might	begin	 to	spread.	 Insolence	must	be	kept	 in



bounds	by	dignity;	then	good	fortune	is	assured.
Nine	at	the	top	means:
He	is	blessed	by	heaven.
Good	fortune.
Nothing	that	does	not	further.

In	 the	 fullness	of	possession	and	at	 the	height	of	power,	one	remains	modest	and	gives	honor	to	 the
sage	who	 stands	outside	 the	affairs	 of	 the	world.	By	 this	means	one	puts	 oneself	 under	 the	beneficent
influence	descending	from	heaven,	and	all	goes	well.	Confucius	says	of	this	line:
“To	bless	means	to	help.	Heaven	helps	the	man	who	is	devoted;	men	help	the	man	who	is	true.	He	who

walks	in	truth	and	is	devoted	in	his	thinking,	and	furthermore	reveres	the	worthy,	is	blessed	by	heaven.
He	has	good	fortune,	and	there	is	nothing	that	would	not	further.”



15.	Ch’ien	/	Modesty

This	hexagram	is	made	up	of	the	trigrams	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	mountain,	and	K’un.	The	mountain	is	the
youngest	son	of	the	Creative,	the	representative	of	heaven	on	earth.	It	dispenses	the	blessings	of	heaven,
the	clouds	and	rain	that	gather	round	its	summit,	and	thereafter	shines	forth	radiant	with	heavenly	light.
This	shows	what	modesty	is	and	how	it	functions	in	great	and	strong	men.	K’un,	the	earth,	stands	above.
Lowliness	is	a	quality	of	the	earth:	this	is	the	very	reason	why	it	appears	in	this	hexagram	as	exalted,	by
being	 placed	 above	 the	mountain.	 This	 shows	 how	modesty	 functions	 in	 lowly,	 simple	 people:	 they	 are
lifted	up	by	it.

THE	JUDGMENT
MODESTY	creates	success.
The	superior	man	carries	things	through.

It	is	the	law	of	heaven	to	make	fullness	empty	and	to	make	full	what	is	modest;	when	the	sun	is	at	its
zenith,	it	must,	according	to	the	law	of	heaven,	turn	toward	its	setting,	and	at	its	nadir	it	rises	toward	a
new	dawn.	In	obedience	to	the	same	law,	the	moon	when	it	is	full	begins	to	wane,	and	when	empty	of	light
it	waxes	again.	This	heavenly	law	works	itself	out	in	the	fates	of	men	also.	It	is	the	law	of	earth	to	alter	the
full	and	to	contribute	to	the	modest.	High	mountains	are	worn	down	by	the	waters,	and	the	valleys	are
filled	up.	 It	 is	 the	 law	of	 fate	 to	undermine	what	 is	 full	 and	 to	prosper	 the	modest.	And	men	also	hate
fullness	and	love	the	modest.
The	destinies	of	men	are	subject	to	immutable	laws	that	must	fulfill	themselves.	But	man	has	it	in	his

power	 to	 shape	 his	 fate,	 according	 as	 his	 behavior	 exposes	 him	 to	 the	 influence	 of	 benevolent	 or	 of
destructive	forces.	When	a	man	holds	a	high	position	and	is	nevertheless	modest,	he	shines	with	the	light
of	wisdom;	if	he	is	in	a	lowly	position	and	is	modest,	he	cannot	be	passed	by.	Thus	the	superior	man	can
carry	out	his	work	to	the	end	without	boasting	of	what	he	has	achieved.

THE	IMAGE
Within	the	earth,	a	mountain:
The	image	of	MODESTY.
Thus	the	superior	man	reduces	that	which	is	too	much,
And	augments	that	which	is	too	little.
He	weighs	things	and	makes	them	equal.

The	wealth	of	the	earth	in	which	a	mountain	is	hidden	is	not	visible	to	the	eye,	because	the	depths	are
offset	 by	 the	 height	 of	 the	mountain.	 Thus	 high	 and	 low	 complement	 each	 other,	 and	 the	 result	 is	 the
plain.	Here	an	effect	that	it	took	a	long	time	to	achieve,	but	that	in	the	end	seems	easy	of	accomplishment
and	 self-evident,	 is	 used	 as	 the	 image	 of	 modesty.	 The	 superior	 man	 does	 the	 same	 thing	 when	 he
establishes	 order	 in	 the	world;	 he	 equalizes	 the	 extremes	 that	 are	 the	 source	 of	 social	 discontent	 and
thereby	creates	just	and	equable	conditions.1

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
A	superior	man	modest	about	his	modesty
May	cross	the	great	water.
Good	fortune.

A	dangerous	enterprise,	such	as	the	crossing	of	a	great	stream,	is	made	much	more	difficult	 if	many
claims	 and	 considerations	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 into	 account.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 the	 task	 is	 easy	 if	 it	 is
attended	to	quickly	and	simply.	Therefore	the	unassuming	attitude	of	mind	that	goes	with	modesty	fits	a
man	to	accomplish	even	difficult	undertakings:	he	imposes	no	demands	or	stipulations	but	settles	matters
easily	and	quickly.	Where	no	claims	are	put	forward,	no	resistances	arise.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Modesty	that	comes	to	expression.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

“Out	of	the	fullness	of	the	heart	the	mouth	speaketh.”	When	a	man’s	attitude	of	mind	is	so	modest	that
this	expresses	itself	 in	his	outward	behavior,	 it	 is	a	source	of	good	fortune	to	him.	For	the	possibility	of
exerting	a	lasting	influence	arises	of	itself,	and	no	one	can	interfere.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
A	superior	man	of	modesty	and	merit
Carries	things	to	conclusion.
Good	fortune.

This	 is	 the	 center	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 where	 its	 secret	 is	 disclosed.	 A	 distinguished	 name	 is	 readily
earned	by	great	achievements.	If	a	man	allows	himself	to	be	dazzled	by	fame,	he	will	soon	be	criticized,
and	 difficulties	 will	 arise.	 If,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 he	 remains	 modest	 despite	 his	 merit,	 he	 makes	 himself
beloved	and	wins	the	support	necessary	for	carrying	his	work	through	to	the	end.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Nothing	that	would	not	further	modesty
In	movement.

Everything	has	its	proper	measure.	Even	modesty	in	behavior	can	be	carried	too	far.	Here,	however,	it



is	appropriate,	because	the	place	between	a	worthy	helper	below	and	a	kindly	ruler	above	carries	great
responsibility.	The	confidence	of	the	man	in	superior	place	must	not	be	abused	nor	the	merits	of	the	man
in	inferior	place	concealed.	There	are	officials	who	indeed	do	not	strive	for	prominence;	they	hide	behind
the	 letter	of	 the	ordinances,	decline	all	 responsibility,	accept	pay	without	giving	 its	equivalent	 in	work,
and	bear	empty	titles.	This	is	the	opposite	of	what	is	meant	here	by	modesty.	In	such	a	position,	modesty
is	shown	by	interest	in	one’s	work.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
No	boasting	of	wealth	before	one’s	neighbor.
It	is	favorable	to	attack	with	force.
Nothing	that	would	not	further.

Modesty	is	not	to	be	confused	with	weak	good	nature	that	lets	things	take	their	own	course.	When	a
man	holds	a	responsible	position,	he	must	at	times	resort	to	energetic	measures.	In	doing	so	he	must	not
try	to	make	an	impression	by	boasting	of	his	superiority	but	must	make	certain	of	the	people	around	him.
The	 measures	 taken	 should	 be	 purely	 objective	 and	 in	 no	 way	 personally	 offensive.	 Thus	 modesty
manifests	itself	even	in	severity.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Modesty	that	comes	to	expression.
It	is	favorable	to	set	armies	marching
To	chastise	one’s	own	city	and	one’s	country.

A	person	who	is	really	sincere	in	his	modesty	must	make	it	show	in	reality.	He	must	proceed	with	great
energy	in	this.	When	enmity	arises	nothing	is	easier	than	to	lay	the	blame	on	another.	A	weak	man	takes
offense	 perhaps,	 and	 draws	 back,	 feeling	 self-pity;	 he	 thinks	 that	 it	 is	 modesty	 that	 keeps	 him	 from
defending	himself.	Genuine	modesty	sets	one	to	creating	order	and	inspires	one	to	begin	by	disciplining
one’s	 own	 ego	 and	 one’s	 immediate	 circle.	 Only	 through	 having	 the	 courage	 to	 marshal	 one’s	 armies
against	oneself,	will	something	forceful	really	be	achieved.2



16.	Yü	/	Enthusiasm

The	strong	line	in	the	fourth	place,	that	of	the	leading	official,	meets	with	response	and	obedience	from
all	 the	 other	 lines,	 which	 are	 all	 weak.	 The	 attribute	 of	 the	 upper	 trigram,	 Chên,	 is	 movement;	 the
attributes	 of	 K’un,	 the	 lower,	 are	 obedience	 and	 devotion.	 This	 begins	 a	 movement	 that	 meets	 with
devotion	and	therefore	inspires	enthusiasm,	carrying	all	with	it.	Of	great	importance,	furthermore,	is	the
law	of	movement	along	the	line	of	 least	resistance,	which	in	this	hexagram	is	enunciated	as	the	law	for
natural	events	and	for	human	life.

THE	JUDGMENT
ENTHUSIASM.	It	furthers	one	to	install	helpers
And	to	set	armies	marching.

The	 time	 of	 ENTHUSIASM	 derives	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 there	 is	 at	 hand	 an	 eminent	 man	 who	 is	 in
sympathy	with	 the	spirit	 of	 the	people	and	acts	 in	accord	with	 it.	Hence	he	 finds	universal	 and	willing
obedience.	 To	 arouse	 enthusiasm	 it	 is	 necessary	 for	 a	man	 to	 adjust	 himself	 and	his	 ordinances	 to	 the
character	 of	 those	 whom	 he	 has	 to	 lead.	 The	 inviolability	 of	 natural	 laws	 rests	 on	 this	 principle	 of
movement	along	the	line	of	least	resistance.	These	laws	are	not	forces	external	to	things	but	represent	the
harmony	of	movement	immanent	in	them.	That	is	why	the	celestial	bodies	do	not	deviate	from	their	orbits
and	why	all	events	in	nature	occur	with	fixed	regularity.	It	is	the	same	with	human	society:	only	such	laws
as	 are	 rooted	 in	 popular	 sentiment	 can	be	 enforced,	while	 laws	 violating	 this	 sentiment	merely	 arouse
resentment.
Again,	it	is	enthusiasm	that	enables	us	to	install	helpers	for	the	completion	of	an	undertaking	without

fear	 of	 secret	 opposition.	 It	 is	 enthusiasm	 too	 that	 can	 unify	mass	movements,	 as	 in	war,	 so	 that	 they
achieve	victory.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	comes	resounding	out	of	the	earth:
The	image	of	ENTHUSIASM.
Thus	the	ancient	kings	made	music
In	order	to	honor	merit,
And	offered	it	with	splendor
To	the	Supreme	Deity,
Inviting	their	ancestors	to	be	present.

When,	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 summer,	 thunder—electrical	 energy—comes	 rushing	 forth	 from	 the	 earth
again,	and	the	first	thunderstorm	refreshes	nature,	a	prolonged	state	of	tension	is	resolved.	Joy	and	relief
make	themselves	felt.	So	too,	music	has	power	to	ease	tension	within	the	heart	and	to	loosen	the	grip	of
obscure	emotions.	The	enthusiasm	of	the	heart	expresses	itself	involuntarily	in	a	burst	of	song,	in	dance
and	rhythmic	movement	of	 the	body.	From	 immemorial	 times	 the	 inspiring	effect	of	 the	 invisible	sound
that	moves	all	hearts,	and	draws	them	together,	has	mystified	mankind.
Rulers	have	made	use	of	this	natural	taste	for	music;	they	elevated	and	regulated	it.	Music	was	looked

upon	as	something	serious	and	holy,	designed	to	purify	the	feelings	of	men.	It	fell	to	music	to	glorify	the
virtues	of	heroes	and	thus	to	construct	a	bridge	to	the	world	of	the	unseen.	In	the	temple	men	drew	near
to	 God	with	music	 and	 pantomimes	 (out	 of	 this	 later	 the	 theater	 developed).	 Religious	 feeling	 for	 the
Creator	 of	 the	 world	 was	 united	 with	 the	 most	 sacred	 of	 human	 feelings,	 that	 of	 reverence	 for	 the
ancestors.	The	ancestors	were	 invited	 to	 these	divine	services	as	guests	of	 the	Ruler	of	Heaven	and	as
representatives	 of	 humanity	 in	 the	 higher	 regions.	 This	 uniting	 of	 the	 human	 past	with	 the	Divinity	 in
solemn	 moments	 of	 religious	 inspiration	 established	 the	 bond	 between	 God	 and	 man.	 The	 ruler	 who
revered	the	Divinity	in	revering	his	ancestors	became	thereby	the	Son	of	Heaven,	in	whom	the	heavenly
and	the	earthly	world	met	in	mystical	contact.
These	 ideas	are	 the	 final	 summation	of	Chinese	culture.	Confucius	has	 said	of	 the	great	 sacrifice	at

which	these	rites	were	performed:	“He	who	could	wholly	comprehend	this	sacrifice	could	rule	the	world
as	though	it	were	spinning	on	his	hand.”

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Enthusiasm	that	expresses	itself
Brings	misfortune.

A	man	in	an	inferior	position	has	aristocratic	connections	about	which	he	boasts	enthusiastically.	This
arrogance	 inevitably	 invites	misfortune.	Enthusiasm	should	never	be	an	egotistic	emotion;	 it	 is	 justified
only	when	it	is	a	general	feeling	that	unites	one	with	others.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Firm	as	a	rock.	Not	a	whole	day.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

This	 describes	 a	 person	who	 does	 not	 allow	 himself	 to	 be	misled	 by	 any	 illusions.	While	 others	 are
letting	themselves	be	dazzled	by	enthusiasm,	he	recognizes	with	perfect	clarity	the	first	signs	of	the	time.
Thus	he	neither	 flatters	those	above	nor	neglects	those	beneath	him;	he	 is	as	 firm	as	a	rock.	When	the
first	sign	of	discord	appears,	he	knows	the	right	moment	for	withdrawing	and	does	not	delay	even	for	a



day.	Perseverance	in	such	conduct	will	bring	good	fortune.	Confucius	says	about	this	line:
“To	know	the	seeds,	 that	 is	divine	 indeed.	 In	his	association	with	those	above	him,	 the	superior

man	does	not	flatter.	In	his	association	with	those	beneath	him,	he	is	not	arrogant.	For	he	knows	the
seeds.	The	seeds	are	the	first	imperceptible	beginning	of	movement,	the	first	trace	of	good	fortune	(or
misfortune)	that	shows	itself.	The	superior	man	perceives	the	seeds	and	immediately	takes	action.	He
does	not	wait	even	a	whole	day.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“Firm	as	a	rock.	Not	a	whole	day.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.”

Firm	as	a	rock,	what	need	of	a	whole	day?
The	judgment	can	be	known.
The	superior	man	knows	what	is	hidden	and	what	is	evident.
He	knows	weakness,	he	knows	strength	as	well.
Hence	the	myriads	look	up	to	him.”
Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Enthusiasm	that	looks	upward	creates	remorse.
Hesitation	brings	remorse.

This	 line	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 preceding	 one:	 the	 latter	 bespeaks	 self-reliance,	while	 here	 there	 is
enthusiastic	 looking	up	 to	 a	 leader.	 If	 a	man	hesitates	 too	 long,	 this	 also	will	 bring	 remorse.	The	 right
moment	for	approach	must	be	seized:	only	then	will	he	do	the	right	thing.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	source	of	enthusiasm.
He	achieves	great	things.
Doubt	not.
You	gather	friends	around	you
As	a	hair	clasp	gathers	the	hair.

This	describes	a	man	who	is	able	to	awaken	enthusiasm	through	his	own	sureness	and	freedom	from
hesitation.	He	attracts	people	because	he	has	no	doubts	and	is	wholly	sincere.	Owing	to	his	confidence	in
them	he	wins	their	enthusiastic	cooperation	and	attains	success.	Just	as	a	clasp	draws	the	hair	 together
and	holds	it,	so	he	draws	men	together	by	the	support	he	gives	them.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Persistently	ill,	and	still	does	not	die.

Here	enthusiasm	is	obstructed.	A	man	is	under	constant	pressure,	which	prevents	him	from	breathing
freely.	However,	 this	 pressure	has	 its	 advantage—it	prevents	him	 from	consuming	his	 powers	 in	 empty
enthusiasm.	Thus	constant	pressure	can	actually	serve	to	keep	one	alive.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Deluded	enthusiasm.
But	if	after	completion	one	changes,
There	is	no	blame.

It	 is	 a	bad	 thing	 for	a	man	 to	 let	himself	be	deluded	by	enthusiasm.	But	 if	 this	delusion	has	 run	 its
course,	and	he	is	still	capable	of	changing,	he	is	freed	of	error.	A	sober	awakening	from	false	enthusiasm
is	quite	possible	and	very	favorable.



17.	Sui	/	Following

The	trigram	Tui,	the	Joyous,	whose	attribute	is	gladness,	is	above;	Chên,	the	Arousing,	which	has	the
attribute	of	movement,	is	below.	Joy	in	movement	induces	following.	The	Joyous	is	the	youngest	daughter,
while	the	Arousing	is	the	eldest	son.	An	older	man	defers	to	a	young	girl	and	shows	her	consideration.	By
this	he	moves	her	to	follow	him.

THE	JUDGMENT
FOLLOWING	has	supreme	success.
Perseverance	furthers.	No	blame.

In	order	to	obtain	a	following	one	must	first	know	how	to	adapt	oneself.	If	a	man	would	rule	he	must
first	 learn	 to	serve,	 for	only	 in	 this	way	does	he	secure	 from	those	below	him	the	 joyous	assent	 that	 is
necessary	if	they	are	to	follow	him.	If	he	has	to	obtain	a	following	by	force	or	cunning,	by	conspiracy	or	by
creating	 factions,	 he	 invariably	 arouses	 resistance,	which	 obstructs	willing	 adherence.	But	 even	 joyous
movement	can	lead	to	evil	consequences,	hence	the	added	stipulation,	“Perseverance	furthers”—that	 is,
consistency	in	doing	right—together	with	“No	blame.”	Just	as	we	should	not	ask	others	to	follow	us	unless
this	 condition	 is	 fulfilled,	 so	 it	 is	 only	 under	 this	 condition	 that	 we	 can	 in	 turn	 follow	 others	 without
coming	to	harm.

The	 thought	 of	 obtaining	 a	 following	 through	 adaptation	 to	 the	 demands	 of	 the	 time	 is	 a	 great	 and
significant	idea;	this	is	why	the	appended	judgment	is	so	favorable.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	in	the	middle	of	the	lake:
The	image	of	FOLLOWING.
Thus	the	superior	man	at	nightfall
Goes	indoors	for	rest	and	recuperation.

In	the	autumn	electricity	withdraws	into	the	earth	again	and	rests.	Here	it	is	the	thunder	in	the	middle
of	 the	 lake	 that	 serves	 as	 the	 image—thunder	 in	 its	 winter	 rest,	 not	 thunder	 in	 motion.	 The	 idea	 of
following	in	the	sense	of	adaptation	to	the	demands	of	the	time	grows	out	of	this	image.	Thunder	in	the
middle	of	 the	 lake	 indicates	times	of	darkness	and	rest.	Similarly,	a	superior	man,	after	being	tirelessly
active	all	day,	allows	himself	rest	and	recuperation	at	night.	No	situation	can	become	favorable	until	one
is	able	to	adapt	to	it	and	does	not	wear	himself	out	with	mistaken	resistance.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
The	standard	is	changing.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
To	go	out	of	the	door	in	company
Produces	deeds.

There	 are	 exceptional	 conditions	 in	 which	 the	 relation	 between	 leader	 and	 followers	 changes.	 It	 is
implicit	 in	 the	 idea	 of	 following	 and	 adaptation	 that	 if	 one	 wants	 to	 lead	 others,	 one	 must	 remain
accessible	and	responsive	to	the	views	of	those	under	him.	At	the	same	time,	however,	he	must	have	firm
principles,	so	 that	he	does	not	vacillate	where	there	 is	only	a	question	of	current	opinion.	Once	we	are
ready	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 opinions	 of	 others,	we	must	 not	 associate	 exclusively	with	people	who	 share	 our
views	 or	with	members	 of	 our	 own	 party;	 instead,	 we	must	 go	 out	 and	mingle	 freely	with	 all	 sorts	 of
people,	friends	or	foes.	That	is	the	only	way	to	achieve	something.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
If	one	clings	to	the	little	boy,
One	loses	the	strong	man.

In	friendships	and	close	relationships	an	individual	must	make	a	careful	choice.	He	surrounds	himself
either	 with	 good	 or	 with	 bad	 company;	 he	 cannot	 have	 both	 at	 once.	 If	 he	 throws	 himself	 away	 on
unworthy	friends	he	loses	connection	with	people	of	intellectual	power	who	could	further	him	in	the	good.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
If	one	clings	to	the	strong	man,
One	loses	the	little	boy.
Through	following	one	finds	what	one	seeks.
It	furthers	one	to	remain	persevering.

When	the	right	connection	with	distinguished	people	has	been	found,	a	certain	loss	naturally	ensues.	A
man	must	part	company	with	the	inferior	and	superficial.	But	in	his	heart	he	will	feel	satisfied,	because	he
will	find	what	he	seeks	and	needs	for	the	development	of	his	personality.	The	important	thing	is	to	remain
firm.	He	must	know	what	he	wants	and	not	be	led	astray	by	momentary	inclinations.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Following	creates	success.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
To	go	one’s	way	with	sincerity	brings	clarity.
How	could	there	be	blame	in	this?

It	 often	 happens,	 when	 a	man	 exerts	 a	 certain	 amount	 of	 influence,	 that	 he	 obtains	 a	 following	 by



condescension	 toward	 inferiors.	 But	 the	 people	 who	 attach	 themselves	 to	 him	 are	 not	 honest	 in	 their
intentions.	They	seek	personal	advantage	and	try	to	make	themselves	indispensable	through	flattery	and
subservience.	 If	 one	 becomes	 accustomed	 to	 such	 satellites	 and	 cannot	 do	 without	 them,	 it	 brings
misfortune.	Only	when	a	man	is	completely	free	from	his	ego,	and	intent,	by	conviction,	upon	what	is	right
and	essential,	does	he	acquire	the	clarity	that	enables	him	to	see	through	such	people,	and	become	free	of
blame.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Sincere	in	the	good.	Good	fortune.

Every	man	must	have	something	he	follows—something	that	serves	him	as	a	lodestar.	He	who	follows
with	conviction	the	beautiful	and	the	good	may	feel	himself	strengthened	by	this	saying.

Six	at	the	top	means:
He	meets	with	firm	allegiance
And	is	still	further	bound.
The	king	introduces	him
To	the	Western	Mountain.

This	refers	to	a	man,	an	exalted	sage,	who	has	already	put	the	turmoil	of	the	world	behind	him.	But	a
follower	appears	who	understands	him	and	is	not	to	be	put	off.	So	the	sage	comes	back	into	the	world	and
aids	the	other	in	his	work.	Thus	there	develops	an	eternal	tie	between	the	two.

The	allegory	 is	chosen	 from	the	annals	of	 the	Chou	dynasty.	The	rulers	of	 this	dynasty	honored	men
who	 had	 served	 them	well	 by	 awarding	 them	 a	 place	 in	 the	 royal	 family’s	 temple	 of	 ancestors	 on	 the
Western	Mountain.	In	this	way	they	were	regarded	as	sharing	in	the	destiny	of	the	ruling	family.



18.	Ku	/	Work	on	What	Has	Been	Spoiled	[Decay]

The	Chinese	character	ku	represents	a	bowl	in	whose	contents	worms	are	breeding.	This	means	decay.
It	has	come	about	because	the	gentle	indifference	of	the	lower	trigram	has	come	together	with	the	rigid
inertia	of	the	upper,	and	the	result	is	stagnation.	Since	this	implies	guilt,	the	conditions	embody	a	demand
for	removal	of	the	cause.	Hence	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram	is	not	simply	“what	has	been	spoiled”	but
“work	on	what	has	been	spoiled.”

THE	JUDGMENT
WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED
Has	supreme	success.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Before	the	starting	point,	three	days.
After	the	starting	point,	three	days.

What	 has	 been	 spoiled	 through	man’s	 fault	 can	 be	made	 good	 again	 through	man’s	work.	 It	 is	 not
immutable	 fate,	 as	 in	 the	 time	of	STANDSTILL,	 that	has	 caused	 the	 state	of	 corruption,	but	 rather	 the
abuse	of	human	freedom.	Work	toward	 improving	conditions	promises	well,	because	 it	accords	with	the
possibilities	of	the	time.	We	must	not	recoil	from	work	and	danger—symbolized	by	crossing	of	the	great
water—but	 must	 take	 hold	 energetically.	 Success	 depends,	 however,	 on	 proper	 deliberation.	 This	 is
expressed	by	 the	 lines,	 “Before	 the	 starting	point,	 three	days.	After	 the	 starting	point,	 three	days.”	We
must	first	know	the	causes	of	corruption	before	we	can	do	away	with	them;	hence	it	 is	necessary	to	be
cautious	during	the	time	before	the	start.	Then	we	must	see	to	it	that	the	new	way	is	safely	entered	upon,
so	that	a	relapse	may	be	avoided;	therefore	we	must	pay	attention	to	the	time	after	the	start.	Decisiveness
and	energy	must	 take	the	place	of	 the	 inertia	and	 indifference	that	have	 led	to	decay,	 in	order	that	 the
ending	may	be	followed	by	a	new	beginning.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	blows	low	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	DECAY.
Thus	the	superior	man	stirs	up	the	people
And	strengthens	their	spirit.

When	the	wind	blows	low	on	the	mountain,	it	is	thrown	back	and	spoils	the	vegetation.	This	contains	a
challenge	 to	 improvement.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 with	 debasing	 attitudes	 and	 fashions;	 they	 corrupt	 human
society.	To	do	away	with	this	corruption,	the	superior	man	must	regenerate	society.	His	methods	likewise
must	be	derived	from	the	two	trigrams,	but	 in	such	a	way	that	their	effects	unfold	in	orderly	sequence.
The	superior	man	must	first	remove	stagnation	by	stirring	up	public	opinion,	as	the	wind	stirs	everything,
and	must	then	strengthen	and	tranquillize	the	character	of	the	people,	as	the	mountain	gives	tranquility
and	nourishment	to	all	that	grows	in	its	vicinity.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
If	there	is	a	son,
No	blame	rests	upon	the	departed	father.
Danger.	In	the	end	good	fortune.

Rigid	adherence	to	tradition	has	resulted	in	decay.	But	the	decay	has	not	yet	penetrated	deeply	and	so
can	still	be	easily	remedied.	It	is	as	if	a	son	were	compensating	for	the	decay	his	father	allowed	to	creep
in.	Then	no	blame	attaches	to	the	father.	However,	one	must	not	overlook	the	danger	or	take	the	matter
too	lightly.	Only	if	one	is	conscious	of	the	danger	connected	with	every	reform	will	everything	go	well	in
the	end.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	mother.
One	must	not	be	too	persevering.

This	 refers	 to	mistakes	 that	 as	 a	 result	 of	 weakness	 have	 brought	 about	 decay—hence	 the	 symbol,
“what	 has	 been	 spoiled	 by	 the	 mother.”	 In	 setting	 things	 right	 in	 such	 a	 case,	 a	 certain	 gentle
consideration	is	called	for.	In	order	not	to	wound,	one	should	not	attempt	to	proceed	too	drastically.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
There	will	be	a	little	remorse.	No	great	blame.

This	describes	a	man	who	proceeds	a	little	too	energetically	in	righting	the	mistakes	of	the	past.	Now
and	then,	as	a	result,	minor	discords	and	annoyances	will	surely	develop.	But	too	much	energy	is	better
than	too	little.	Therefore,	although	he	may	at	times	have	some	slight	cause	for	regret,	he	remains	free	of
any	serious	blame.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Tolerating	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
In	continuing	one	sees	humiliation.

This	shows	the	situation	of	someone	too	weak	to	take	measures	against	decay	that	has	its	roots	in	the



past	and	is	just	beginning	to	manifest	itself.	It	is	allowed	to	run	its	course.	If	this	continues,	humiliation
will	result.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
One	meets	with	praise.

An	 individual	 is	 confronted	 with	 corruption	 originating	 from	 neglect	 in	 former	 times.	 He	 lacks	 the
power	 to	ward	 it	 off	 alone,	 but	with	 able	 helpers	 he	 can	 at	 least	 bring	 about	 a	 thorough	 reform,	 if	 he
cannot	create	a	new	beginning,	and	this	also	is	praiseworthy.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
He	does	not	serve	kings	and	princes,
Sets	himself	higher	goals.

Not	 every	 man	 has	 an	 obligation	 to	 mingle	 in	 the	 affairs	 of	 the	 world.	 There	 are	 some	 who	 are
developed	to	such	a	degree	that	they	are	justified	in	letting	the	world	go	its	own	way	and	in	refusing	to
enter	public	life	with	a	view	to	reforming	it.	But	this	does	not	imply	a	right	to	remain	idle	or	to	sit	back
and	merely	criticize.	Such	withdrawal	 is	 justified	only	when	we	strive	to	realize	 in	ourselves	the	higher
aims	 of	 mankind.	 For	 although	 the	 sage	 remains	 distant	 from	 the	 turmoil	 of	 daily	 life,	 he	 creates
incomparable	human	values	for	the	future.1



19.	Lin	/	Approach

The	Chinese	word	 lin	 has	 a	 range	of	meanings	 that	 is	 not	 exhausted	by	 any	 single	word	of	 another
language.	The	ancient	explanations	in	the	Book	of	Changes	give	as	 its	first	meaning,	“becoming	great.”
What	 becomes	 great	 are	 the	 two	 strong	 lines	 growing	 into	 the	 hexagram	 from	 below;	 the	 light-giving
power	 expands	 with	 them.	 The	meaning	 is	 then	 further	 extended	 to	 include	 the	 concept	 of	 approach,
especially	 the	 approach	 of	 what	 is	 strong	 and	 highly	 placed	 in	 relation	 to	 what	 is	 lower.	 Finally	 the
meaning	 includes	 the	 attitude	 of	 condescension	 of	 a	 man	 in	 high	 position	 toward	 the	 people,	 and	 in
general	the	setting	to	work	on	affairs.	This	hexagram	is	linked	with	the	twelfth	month	(January–February),
when,	after	the	winter	solstice,	the	light	power	begins	to	ascend	again.

THE	JUDGMENT
APPPROACH	has	supreme	success.
Perseverance	furthers.
When	the	eighth	month	comes,
There	will	be	misfortune.

The	hexagram	as	a	whole	points	to	a	time	of	joyous,	hopeful	progress.	Spring	is	approaching.	Joy	and
forbearance	bring	high	and	low	nearer	together.	Success	is	certain.	But	we	must	work	with	determination
and	perseverance	to	make	full	use	of	the	propitiousness	of	the	time.	And	one	thing	more:	spring	does	not
last	forever.	In	the	eighth	month	the	aspects	are	reversed.	Then	only	two	strong,	light	lines	are	left;	these
do	not	advance	but	are	in	retreat	(see	next	hexagram).	We	must	take	heed	of	this	change	in	good	time.	If
we	meet	evil	before	it	becomes	reality—before	it	has	even	begun	to	stir—we	can	master	it.

THE	IMAGE
The	earth	above	the	lake:
The	image	of	APPROACH.
Thus	the	superior	man	is	inexhaustible
In	his	will	to	teach,
And	without	limits
In	his	tolerance	and	protection	of	the	people.

The	earth	borders	upon	the	lake	from	above.1	This	symbolizes	the	approach	and	condescension	of	the
man	of	higher	position	to	those	beneath	him.	The	two	parts	of	the	image	indicate	what	his	attitude	toward
these	people	will	be.	Just	as	the	lake	is	inexhaustible	in	depth,	so	the	sage	is	inexhaustible	in	his	readiness
to	teach	mankind,	and	just	as	the	earth	is	boundlessly	wide,	sustaining	and	caring	for	all	creatures	on	it,
so	the	sage	sustains	and	cares	for	all	people	and	excludes	no	part	of	humanity.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Joint	approach.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

The	good	begins	to	prevail	and	to	find	response	in	influential	circles.	This	in	turn	is	an	incentive	to	men
of	ability.	It	is	well	to	join	this	upward	trend,	but	we	must	not	let	ourselves	be	carried	away	by	the	current
of	the	time;	we	must	adhere	perseveringly	to	what	is	right.	This	brings	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Joint	approach.
Good	fortune.
Everything	furthers.

When	the	stimulus	to	approach	comes	from	a	high	place,	and	when	a	man	has	the	inner	strength	and
consistency	that	need	no	admonition,	good	fortune	will	ensue.	Nor	need	the	future	cause	any	concern.	He
is	well	aware	that	everything	earthly	is	transitory,	and	that	a	descent	follows	upon	every	rise,	but	need	not
be	confused	by	this	universal	law	of	fate.	Everything	serves	to	further.	Therefore	he	will	travel	the	paths
of	life	swiftly,	honestly,	and	valiantly.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Comfortable	approach.
Nothing	that	would	further.
If	one	is	induced	to	grieve	over	it,
One	becomes	free	of	blame.

Things	are	going	well	for	a	man:	he	achieves	power	and	influence.	But	in	this	lies	the	danger	that	he
may	relax,	and	confident	of	his	position,	allow	the	easygoing,	careless	mood	to	show	itself	in	his	dealings
with	other	people.	This	would	 inevitably	be	harmful.	But	 there	 is	possibility	of	a	change	of	mood.	 If	he
regrets	 his	mistaken	 attitude	 and	 feels	 the	 responsibility	 of	 an	 influential	 position,	 he	 frees	 himself	 of
faults.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Complete	approach.
No	blame.

While	 the	 three	 lower	 lines	 indicate	 rise	 to	 power	 and	 influence,	 the	 three	 upper	 lines	 show	 the
attitude	of	persons	in	higher	position	toward	those	of	lower	rank	for	whom	they	procure	influence.	Here	is



shown	the	open-minded	approach	of	a	person	of	high	rank	to	a	man	of	ability	whom	he	draws	into	his	own
circle,	regardless	of	class	prejudice.	This	is	very	favorable.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Wise	approach.
This	is	right	for	a	great	prince.
Good	fortune.

A	prince,	or	anyone	in	a	leading	position,	must	have	the	wisdom	to	attract	to	himself	people	of	ability
who	are	expert	in	directing	affairs.	His	wisdom	consists	both	in	selecting	the	right	people	and	in	allowing
those	chosen	to	have	a	free	hand	without	interference	from	him.	For	only	through	such	self-restraint	will
he	find	the	experts	needed	to	satisfy	all	of	his	requirements.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Greathearted	approach.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.

A	sage	who	has	put	the	world	behind	him	and	who	in	spirit	has	already	withdrawn	from	life	may,	under
certain	circumstances,	decide	to	return	once	more	to	the	here	and	now	and	to	approach	other	men.	This
means	 great	 good	 fortune	 for	 the	 men	 whom	 he	 teaches	 and	 helps.	 And	 for	 him	 this	 greathearted
humbling	of	himself	is	blameless.



20.	Kuan	/	Contemplation	(View)

A	slight	variation	of	tonal	stress	gives	the	Chinese	name	for	this	hexagram	a	double	meaning.	It	means
both	contemplating	and	being	seen,	in	the	sense	of	being	an	example.	These	ideas	are	suggested	by	the
fact	that	the	hexagram	can	be	understood	as	picturing	a	type	of	tower	characteristic	of	ancient	China.

A	 tower	 of	 this	 kind	 commanded	 a	wide	 view	 of	 the	 country;	 at	 the	 same	 time,	when	 situated	 on	 a
mountain,	 it	became	a	landmark	that	could	be	seen	for	miles	around.	Thus	the	hexagram	shows	a	ruler
who	contemplates	the	law	of	heaven	above	him	and	the	ways	of	the	people	below,	and	who,	by	means	of
good	government,	sets	a	lofty	example	to	the	masses.

This	hexagram	is	 linked	with	the	eighth	month	(September–October).	The	light-giving	power	retreats
and	the	dark	power	is	again	on	the	increase.	However,	this	aspect	is	not	material	in	the	interpretation	of
the	hexagram	as	a	whole.

THE	JUDGMENT
CONTEMPLATION.	The	ablution	has	been	made,
But	not	yet	the	offering.
Full	of	trust	they	look	up	to	him.

The	sacrificial	ritual	 in	China	began	with	an	ablution	and	a	 libation	by	which	the	Deity	was	 invoked,
after	which	 the	 sacrifice	was	 offered.	 The	moment	 of	 time	 between	 these	 two	 ceremonies	 is	 the	most
sacred	of	all,	the	moment	of	deepest	inner	concentration.	If	piety	is	sincere	and	expressive	of	real	faith,
the	contemplation	of	it	has	a	transforming	and	awe-inspiring	effect	on	those	who	witness	it.

Thus	also	in	nature	a	holy	seriousness	is	to	be	seen	in	the	fact	that	natural	occurrences	are	uniformly
subject	to	law.	Contemplation	of	the	divine	meaning	underlying	the	workings	of	the	universe	gives	to	the
man	who	is	called	upon	to	influence	others	the	means	of	producing	like	effects.	This	requires	that	power
of	 inner	 concentration	which	 religious	 contemplation	 develops	 in	 great	men	 strong	 in	 faith.	 It	 enables
them	 to	 apprehend	 the	 mysterious	 and	 divine	 laws	 of	 life,	 and	 by	 means	 of	 profoundest	 inner
concentration	 they	 give	 expression	 to	 these	 laws	 in	 their	 own	 persons.	 Thus	 a	 hidden	 spiritual	 power
emanates	from	them,	influencing	and	dominating	others	without	their	being	aware	of	how	it	happens.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	blows	over	the	earth:
The	image	of	CONTEMPLATION.
Thus	the	kings	of	old	visited	the	regions	of	the	world,
Contemplated	the	people,
And	gave	them	instruction.

When	the	wind	blows	over	the	earth	it	goes	far	and	wide,	and	the	grass	must	bend	to	its	power.	These
two	occurrences	find	confirmation	in	the	hexagram.	The	two	images	are	used	to	symbolize	a	practice	of
the	kings	of	old;	in	making	regular	journeys	the	ruler	could,	in	the	first	place,	survey	his	realm	and	make
certain	 that	 none	 of	 the	 existing	 usages	 of	 the	 people	 escaped	 notice;	 in	 the	 second,	 he	 could	 exert
influence	through	which	such	customs	as	were	unsuitable	could	be	changed.

All	of	this	points	to	the	power	possessed	by	a	superior	personality.	On	the	one	hand,	such	a	man	will
have	a	view	of	the	real	sentiments	of	the	great	mass	of	humanity	and	therefore	cannot	be	deceived;	on	the
other,	he	will	impress	the	people	so	profoundly,	by	his	mere	existence	and	by	the	impact	of	his	personality,
that	they	will	be	swayed	by	him	as	the	grass	by	the	wind.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Boylike	contemplation.
For	an	inferior	man,	no	blame.
For	a	superior	man,	humiliation.

This	means	contemplation	from	a	distance,	without	comprehension.	A	man	of	influence	is	at	hand,	but
his	 influence	is	not	understood	by	the	common	people.	This	matters	 little	 in	the	case	of	the	masses,	 for
they	benefit	by	 the	actions	of	 the	ruling	sage	whether	 they	understand	 them	or	not.	But	 for	a	superior
man	it	is	a	disgrace.	He	must	not	content	himself	with	a	shallow,	thoughtless	view	of	prevailing	forces;	he
must	contemplate	them	as	a	connected	whole	and	try	to	understand	them.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Contemplation	through	the	crack	of	the	door.
Furthering	for	the	perseverance	of	a	woman.

Through	the	crack	of	the	door	one	has	a	limited	outlook;	one	looks	outward	from	within.	Contemplation
is	subjectively	limited.	One	tends	to	relate	everything	to	oneself	and	cannot	put	oneself	in	another’s	place
and	understand	his	motives.	This	 is	appropriate	 for	a	good	housewife.	 It	 is	not	necessary	 for	her	 to	be
conversant	with	 the	affairs	of	 the	world.	But	 for	a	man	who	must	 take	active	part	 in	public	 life,	such	a
narrow,	egotistic	way	of	contemplating	things	is	of	course	harmful.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Contemplation	of	my	life
Decides	the	choice



Between	advance	and	retreat.
This	 is	 the	 place	 of	 transition.	We	no	 longer	 look	 outward	 to	 receive	 pictures	 that	 are	more	 or	 less

limited	 and	 confused,	 but	 direct	 our	 contemplation	 upon	 ourselves	 in	 order	 to	 find	 a	 guideline	 for	 our
decisions.	 This	 self-contemplation	 means	 the	 overcoming	 of	 naïve	 egotism	 in	 the	 person	 who	 sees
everything	 solely	 from	 his	 own	 standpoint.	 He	 begins	 to	 reflect	 and	 in	 this	 way	 acquires	 objectivity.
However,	self-knowledge	does	not	mean	preoccupation	with	one’s	own	thoughts;	rather,	it	means	concern
about	 the	 effects	 one	 creates.	 It	 is	 only	 the	 effects	 our	 lives	 produce	 that	 give	 us	 the	 right	 to	 judge
whether	what	we	have	done	means	progress	or	regression.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Contemplation	of	the	light	of	the	kingdom.
It	furthers	one	to	exert	influence	as	the	guest	of	a	king.

This	describes	a	man	who	understands	the	secrets	by	which	a	kingdom	can	be	made	to	flourish.	Such	a
man	must	be	given	an	authoritative	position,	in	which	he	can	exert	influence.	He	should	be,	so	to	speak,	a
guest—that	is,	he	should	be	honored	and	allowed	to	act	independently,	and	should	not	be	used	as	a	tool.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Contemplation	of	my	life.
The	superior	man	is	without	blame.

A	man	in	an	authoritative	position	to	whom	others	look	up	must	always	be	ready	for	self-examination.
The	right	sort	of	self-examination,	however,	consists	not	in	idle	brooding	over	oneself	but	in	examining	the
effects	one	produces.	Only	when	these	effects	are	good,	and	when	one’s	influence	on	others	is	good,	will
the	contemplation	of	one’s	own	life	bring	the	satisfaction	of	knowing	oneself	to	be	free	of	mistakes.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Contemplation	of	his	life.
The	superior	man	is	without	blame.

While	 the	 preceding	 line	 represents	 a	 man	 who	 contemplates	 himself,	 here	 in	 the	 highest	 place
everything	 that	 is	 personal,	 related	 to	 the	 ego,	 is	 excluded.	 The	 picture	 is	 that	 of	 a	 sage	 who	 stands
outside	the	affairs	of	the	world.	Liberated	from	his	ego,	he	contemplates	the	laws	of	life	and	so	realizes
that	knowing	how	to	become	free	of	blame	is	the	highest	good.



21.	Shih	Ho	/	Biting	Through

This	hexagram	represents	an	open	mouth	(cf.	hexagram	27)	with	an	obstruction	(in	the	fourth	place)
between	the	teeth.	As	a	result	the	lips	cannot	meet.	To	bring	them	together	one	must	bite	energetically
through	 the	 obstacle.	 Since	 the	 hexagram	 is	made	 up	 of	 the	 trigrams	 for	 thunder	 and	 for	 lightning,	 it
indicates	how	obstacles	are	forcibly	removed	in	nature.	Energetic	biting	through	overcomes	the	obstacle
that	 prevents	 joining	 of	 the	 lips;	 the	 storm	 with	 its	 thunder	 and	 lightning	 overcomes	 the	 disturbing
tension	 in	 nature.	Recourse	 to	 law	 and	 penalties	 overcomes	 the	 disturbances	 of	 harmonious	 social	 life
caused	by	criminals	and	slanderers.	The	theme	of	this	hexagram	is	a	criminal	lawsuit,	in	contradistinction
to	that	of	Sung,	CONFLICT	(6),	which	refers	to	civil	suits.

THE	JUDGMENT
BITING	THROUGH	has	success.
It	is	favorable	to	let	justice	be	administered.

When	an	obstacle	to	union	arises,	energetic	biting	through	brings	success.	This	is	true	in	all	situations.
Whenever	unity	cannot	be	established,	the	obstruction	is	due	to	a	talebearer	and	traitor	who	is	interfering
and	blocking	the	way.	To	prevent	permanent	injury,	vigorous	measures	must	be	taken	at	once.	Deliberate
obstruction	of	this	sort	does	not	vanish	of	its	own	accord.	Judgment	and	punishment	are	required	to	deter
or	obviate	it.

However,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 proceed	 in	 the	 right	way.	 The	hexagram	combines	Li,	 clarity,	 and	Chên,
excitement.	 Li	 is	 yielding,	 Chên	 is	 hard.	 Unqualified	 hardness	 and	 excitement	 would	 be	 too	 violent	 in
meting	out	punishment;	unqualified	clarity	and	gentleness	would	be	 too	weak.	The	 two	 together	create
the	just	measure.	It	is	of	moment	that	the	man	who	makes	the	decisions	(represented	by	the	fifth	line)	is
gentle	by	nature,	while	he	commands	respect	by	his	conduct	in	his	position.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	and	lightning:
The	image	of	BITING	THROUGH.
Thus	the	kings	of	former	times	made	firm	the	laws
Through	clearly	defined	penalties.

Penalties	 are	 the	 individual	 applications	 of	 the	 law.	 The	 laws	 specify	 the	 penalties.	 Clarity	 prevails
when	mild	and	severe	penalties	are	clearly	differentiated,	according	to	the	nature	of	the	crimes.	This	is
symbolized	by	the	clarity	of	 lightning.	The	law	is	strengthened	by	a	just	application	of	penalties.	This	is
symbolized	by	the	terror	of	thunder.	This	clarity	and	severity	have	the	effect	of	instilling	respect;	it	is	not
that	the	penalties	are	ends	in	themselves.	The	obstructions	in	the	social	life	of	man	increase	when	there	is
lack	of	clarity	in	the	penal	codes	and	slackness	in	executing	them.	The	only	way	to	strengthen	the	law	is
to	make	it	clear	and	to	make	penalties	certain	and	swift.

THE	LINES1

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
His	feet	are	fastened	in	the	stocks,
So	that	his	toes	disappear.
No	blame.

If	a	sentence	is	imposed	the	first	time	a	man	attempts	to	do	wrong,	the	penalty	is	a	mild	one.	Only	the
toes	are	put	in	the	stocks.	This	prevents	him	from	sinning	further	and	thus	he	becomes	free	of	blame.	It	is
a	warning	to	halt	in	time	on	the	path	of	evil.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Bites	through	tender	meat,
So	that	his	nose	disappears.
No	blame.

It	 is	easy	to	discriminate	between	right	and	wrong	in	this	case;	 it	 is	 like	biting	through	tender	meat.
But	one	encounters	a	hardened	sinner,	and,	aroused	by	anger,	one	goes	a	little	too	far.	The	disappearance
of	the	nose	in	the	course	of	the	bite	signifies	that	indignation	blots	out	finer	sensibility.	However,	there	is
no	great	harm	in	this,	because	the	penalty	as	such	is	just.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Bites	on	old	dried	meat
And	strikes	on	something	poisonous.
Slight	humiliation.	No	blame.

Punishment	is	to	be	carried	out	by	someone	who	lacks	the	power	and	authority	to	do	so.	Therefore	the
culprits	do	not	submit.	The	matter	at	issue	is	an	old	one—as	symbolized	by	salted	game—and	in	dealing
with	it	difficulties	arise.	This	old	meat	is	spoiled:	by	taking	up	the	problem	the	punisher	arouses	poisonous
hatred	against	himself,	and	in	this	way	is	put	in	a	somewhat	humiliating	position.	But	since	punishment
was	required	by	the	time,	he	remains	free	of	blame.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Bites	on	dried	gristly	meat.



Receives	metal	arrows.
It	furthers	one	to	be	mindful	of	difficulties
And	to	be	persevering.
Good	fortune.

There	 are	 great	 obstacles	 to	 be	 overcome,	 powerful	 opponents	 are	 to	 be	 punished.	 Though	 this	 is
arduous,	the	effort	succeeds.	But	it	is	necessary	to	be	hard	as	metal	and	straight	as	an	arrow	to	surmount
the	 difficulties.	 If	 one	 knows	 these	 difficulties	 and	 remains	 persevering,	 he	 attains	 good	 fortune.	 The
difficult	task	is	achieved	in	the	end.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Bites	on	dried	lean	meat.
Receives	yellow	gold.
Perseveringly	aware	of	danger.
No	blame.

The	case	to	be	decided	is	indeed	not	easy	but	perfectly	clear.	Since	we	naturally	incline	to	leniency,	we
must	make	every	effort	to	be	like	yellow	gold—that	is,	as	true	as	gold	and	as	impartial	as	yellow,	the	color
of	 the	 middle	 [the	 mean].	 It	 is	 only	 by	 remaining	 conscious	 of	 the	 dangers	 growing	 out	 of	 the
responsibility	we	have	assumed	that	we	can	avoid	making	mistakes.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
His	neck	is	fastened	in	the	wooden	cangue,
So	that	his	ears	disappear.
Misfortune.

In	contrast	to	the	first	line,	this	line	refers	to	a	man	who	is	incorrigible.	His	punishment	is	the	wooden
cangue,	 and	his	 ears	disappear	under	 it—that	 is	 to	 say,	he	 is	deaf	 to	warnings.	This	obstinacy	 leads	 to
misfortune.2



22.	Pi	/	Grace

This	 hexagram	 shows	 a	 fire	 that	 breaks	 out	 of	 the	 secret	 depths	 of	 the	 earth	 and,	 blazing	 up,
illuminates	and	beautifies	the	mountain,	the	heavenly	heights.	Grace—beauty	of	form—is	necessary	in	any
union	if	it	is	to	be	well	ordered	and	pleasing	rather	than	disordered	and	chaotic.

THE	JUDGMENT
GRACE	has	success.
In	small	matters
It	is	favorable	to	undertake	something.

Grace	brings	success.	However,	it	is	not	the	essential	or	fundamental	thing;	it	is	only	the	ornament	and
must	therefore	be	used	sparingly	and	only	in	little	things.	In	the	lower	trigram	of	fire	a	yielding	line	comes
between	two	strong	lines	and	makes	them	beautiful,	but	the	strong	lines	are	the	essential	content	and	the
weak	line	is	the	beautifying	form.	In	the	upper	trigram	of	the	mountain,	the	strong	line	takes	the	lead,	so
that	here	again	the	strong	element	must	be	regarded	as	the	decisive	factor.	In	nature	we	see	in	the	sky
the	strong	light	of	the	sun;	the	life	of	the	world	depends	on	it.	But	this	strong,	essential	thing	is	changed
and	given	pleasing	variety	by	the	moon	and	the	stars.	In	human	affairs,	aesthetic	form	comes	into	being
when	 traditions	 exist	 that,	 strong	and	abiding	 like	mountains,	 are	made	pleasing	by	 a	 lucid	beauty.	By
contemplating	the	forms	existing	in	the	heavens	we	come	to	understand	time	and	its	changing	demands.
Through	contemplation	of	the	forms	existing	in	human	society	it	becomes	possible	to	shape	the	world.1

THE	IMAGE
Fire	at	the	foot	of	the	mountain:
The	image	of	GRACE.
Thus	does	the	superior	man	proceed
When	clearing	up	current	affairs.
But	he	dare	not	decide	controversial	issues	in	this	way.

The	fire,	whose	light	illuminates	the	mountain	and	makes	it	pleasing,	does	not	shine	far;	in	the	same
way,	beautiful	form	suffices	to	brighten	and	to	throw	light	upon	matters	of	lesser	moment,	but	important
questions	cannot	be	decided	in	this	way.	They	require	greater	earnestness.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
He	lends	grace	to	his	toes,	leaves	the	carriage,	and	walks.

A	beginner	in	a	subordinate	place	must	take	upon	himself	the	labor	of	advancing.	There	might	be	an
opportunity	 of	 surreptitiously	 easing	 the	 way—symbolized	 by	 the	 carriage—but	 a	 self-contained	 man
scorns	 help	 gained	 in	 a	 dubious	 fashion.	 He	 thinks	 it	 more	 graceful	 to	 go	 on	 foot	 than	 to	 drive	 in	 a
carriage	under	false	pretenses.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Lends	grace	to	the	beard	on	his	chin.

The	beard	 is	not	an	 independent	thing;	 it	moves	only	with	the	chin.	The	 image	therefore	means	that
form	is	to	be	considered	only	as	a	result	and	attribute	of	content.	The	beard	is	a	superfluous	ornament.	To
devote	care	to	it	for	its	own	sake,	without	regard	for	the	inner	content	of	which	it	is	an	ornament,	would
bespeak	a	certain	vanity.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Graceful	and	moist.
Constant	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

This	represents	a	very	charming	 life	situation.	One	 is	under	the	spell	of	grace	and	the	mellow	mood
induced	 by	wine.	 This	 grace	 can	 adorn,	 but	 it	 can	 also	 swamp	us.	Hence	 the	warning	 not	 to	 sink	 into
convivial	indolence	but	to	remain	constant	in	perseverance.	Good	fortune	depends	on	this.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Grace	or	simplicity?
A	white	horse	comes	as	if	on	wings.
He	is	not	a	robber,
He	will	woo	at	the	right	time.

An	 individual	 is	 in	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 doubts	 arise	 as	 to	 which	 is	 better—to	 pursue	 the	 grace	 of
external	brilliance,	or	to	return	to	simplicity.	The	doubt	itself	implies	the	answer.	Confirmation	comes	from
the	outside;	 it	 comes	 like	a	white	winged	horse.	The	white	 color	 indicates	 simplicity.	At	 first	 it	may	be
disappointing	to	renounce	comforts	that	might	have	been	obtained,	yet	one	finds	peace	of	mind	in	a	true
relationship	 with	 the	 friend	 who	 courts	 him.	 The	 winged	 horse	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 the	 thoughts	 that
transcend	all	limits	of	space	and	time.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Grace	in	hills	and	gardens.
The	roll	of	silk	is	meager	and	small.
Humiliation,	but	in	the	end	good	fortune.

A	man	withdraws	 from	contact	with	people	of	 the	 lowlands,	who	seek	nothing	but	magnificence	and
luxury,	into	the	solitude	of	the	heights.	There	he	finds	an	individual	to	look	up	to,	whom	he	would	like	to



have	as	a	friend.	But	the	gifts	he	has	to	offer	are	poor	and	few,	so	that	he	feels	ashamed.	However,	it	is	not
the	material	gifts	that	count,	but	sincerity	of	feeling,	and	so	all	goes	well	in	the	end.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Simple	grace.	No	blame.

Here	at	the	highest	stage	of	development	all	ornament	is	discarded.	Form	no	longer	conceals	content
but	brings	out	its	value	to	the	full.	Perfect	grace	consists	not	in	exterior	ornamentation	of	the	substance,
but	in	the	simple	fitness	of	its	form.



23.	Po	/	Splitting	Apart

The	 dark	 lines	 are	 about	 to	 mount	 upward	 and	 overthrow	 the	 last	 firm,	 light	 line	 by	 exerting	 a
disintegrating	 influence	 on	 it.	 The	 inferior,	 dark	 forces	 overcome	 what	 is	 superior	 and	 strong,	 not	 by
direct	means,	but	by	undermining	it	gradually	and	imperceptibly,	so	that	it	finally	collapses.

The	lines	of	the	hexagram	present	the	image	of	a	house,	the	top	line	being	the	roof,	and	because	the
roof	 is	 being	 shattered	 the	 house	 collapses.	 The	 hexagram	 belongs	 to	 the	 ninth	 month	 (October–
November).	 The	 yin	 power	 pushes	 up	 ever	 more	 powerfully	 and	 is	 about	 to	 supplant	 the	 yang	 power
altogether.

THE	JUDGMENT
SPLITTING	APART.	It	does	not	further	one
To	go	anywhere.

This	 pictures	 a	 time	when	 inferior	 people	 are	 pushing	 forward	 and	 are	 about	 to	 crowd	 out	 the	 few
remaining	 strong	 and	 superior	 men.	 Under	 these	 circumstances,	 which	 are	 due	 to	 the	 time,	 it	 is	 not
favorable	for	the	superior	man	to	undertake	anything.

The	right	behavior	 in	such	adverse	times	 is	to	be	deduced	from	the	 images	and	their	attributes.	The
lower	trigram	stands	for	the	earth,	whose	attributes	are	docility	and	devotion.	The	upper	trigram	stands
for	the	mountain,	whose	attribute	is	stillness.	This	suggests	that	one	should	submit	to	the	bad	time	and
remain	quiet.	For	it	is	a	question	not	of	man’s	doing	but	of	time	conditions,	which,	according	to	the	laws	of
heaven,	 show	 an	 alternation	 of	 increase	 and	 decrease,	 fullness	 and	 emptiness.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
counteract	these	conditions	of	the	time.	Hence	it	is	not	cowardice	but	wisdom	to	submit	and	avoid	action.

THE	IMAGE
The	mountain	rests	on	the	earth:
The	image	of	SPLITTING	APART.
Thus	those	above	can	ensure	their	position
Only	by	giving	generously	to	those	below.

The	mountain	 rests	 on	 the	earth.	When	 it	 is	 steep	and	narrow,	 lacking	a	broad	base,	 it	must	 topple
over.	 Its	position	 is	strong	only	when	it	rises	out	of	 the	earth	broad	and	great,	not	proud	and	steep.	So
likewise	 those	who	 rule	 rest	 on	 the	 broad	 foundation	 of	 the	 people.	 They	 too	 should	 be	 generous	 and
benevolent,	like	the	earth	that	carries	all.	Then	they	will	make	their	position	as	secure	as	a	mountain	is	in
its	tranquility.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
The	leg	of	the	bed	is	split.
Those	who	persevere	are	destroyed.
Misfortune.

Inferior	people	are	on	the	rise	and	stealthily	begin	their	destructive	burrowing	from	below	in	order	to
undermine	 the	 place	where	 the	 superior	man	 rests.	 Those	 followers	 of	 the	 ruler	who	 remain	 loyal	 are
destroyed	by	slander	and	intrigue.	The	situation	bodes	disaster,	yet	there	is	nothing	to	do	but	wait.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	bed	is	split	at	the	edge.
Those	who	persevere	are	destroyed.
Misfortune.

The	power	of	the	inferior	people	is	growing.	The	danger	draws	close	to	one’s	person;	already	there	are
dear	indications,	and	rest	is	disturbed.	Moreover,	in	this	dangerous	situation	one	is	as	yet	without	help	or
friendly	advances	from	above	or	below.	Extreme	caution	is	necessary	in	this	isolation.	One	must	adjust	to
the	 time	and	promptly	avoid	 the	danger.	Stubborn	perseverance	 in	maintaining	one’s	 standpoint	would
lead	to	downfall.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
He	splits	with	them.	No	blame.

An	individual	finds	himself	in	an	evil	environment	to	which	he	is	committed	by	external	ties.	But	he	has
an	inner	relationship	with	a	superior	man,	and	through	this	he	attains	the	stability	to	free	himself	from	the
way	of	the	inferior	people	around	him.	This	brings	him	into	opposition	to	them	of	course,	but	that	is	not
wrong.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	bed	is	split	up	to	the	skin.
Misfortune.

Here	 the	 disaster	 affects	 not	 only	 the	 resting	 place	 but	 even	 the	 occupant.	 No	 warning	 or	 other
comment	is	added.	Misfortune	has	reached	its	peak:	it	can	no	longer	be	warded	off.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
A	shoal	of	fishes.	Favor	comes	through	the	court	ladies.
Everything	acts	to	further.

Here,	 in	 immediate	 proximity	 to	 the	 strong,	 light-giving	 principle	 at	 the	 top,	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 dark
force	undergoes	a	change.	It	no	longer	opposes	the	strong	principle	by	means	of	intrigues	but	submits	to



its	guidance.	Indeed,	as	the	head	of	the	other	weak	lines,	it	leads	all	of	these	to	the	strong	line,	just	as	a
princess	 leads	 her	 maids-in-waiting	 like	 a	 shoal	 of	 fishes	 to	 her	 husband	 and	 thus	 gains	 his	 favor.
Inasmuch	as	the	lower	element	thus	voluntarily	places	itself	under	the	higher,	it	attains	happiness	and	the
higher	also	receives	its	due.	Therefore	all	goes	well.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
There	is	a	large	fruit	still	uneaten.
The	superior	man	receives	a	carriage.
The	house	of	the	inferior	man	is	split	apart.

Here	 the	 splitting	 apart	 reaches	 its	 end.	When	misfortune	has	 spent	 itself,	 better	 times	 return.	 The
seed	of	the	good	remains,	and	it	is	just	when	the	fruit	falls	to	the	ground	that	good	sprouts	anew	from	its
seed.	The	superior	man	again	attains	influence	and	effectiveness.	He	is	supported	by	public	opinion	as	if
in	a	carriage.	But	the	inferior	man’s	wickedness	is	visited	upon	himself.	His	house	is	split	apart.	A	law	of
nature	is	at	work	here.	Evil	is	not	destructive	to	the	good	alone	but	inevitably	destroys	itself	as	well.	For
evil,	which	lives	solely	by	negation,	cannot	continue	to	exist	on	its	own	strength	alone.	The	inferior	man
himself	fares	best	when	held	under	control	by	a	superior	man.



24.	Fu	/	Return	(The	Turning	Point)

The	 idea	of	a	 turning	point	arises	 from	the	 fact	 that	after	 the	dark	 lines	have	pushed	all	of	 the	 light
lines	upward	and	out	of	 the	hexagram,	another	 light	 line	enters	 the	hexagram	from	below.	The	 time	of
darkness	is	past.	The	winter	solstice	brings	the	victory	of	light.	This	hexagram	is	linked	with	the	eleventh
month,	the	month	of	the	solstice	(December–January).

THE	JUDGMENT
RETURN.	Success.
Going	out	and	coming	in	without	error.
Friends	come	without	blame.
To	and	fro	goes	the	way.
On	the	seventh	day	comes	return.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.

After	 a	 time	 of	 decay	 comes	 the	 turning	 point.	 The	 powerful	 light	 that	 has	 been	 banished	 returns.
There	 is	 movement,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 brought	 about	 by	 force.	 The	 upper	 trigram	 K’un	 is	 characterized	 by
devotion;	thus	the	movement	is	natural,	arising	spontaneously.	For	this	reason	the	transformation	of	the
old	becomes	easy.	The	old	is	discarded	and	the	new	is	introduced.	Both	measures	accord	with	the	time;
therefore	no	harm	results.	Societies	of	people	sharing	the	same	views	are	formed.	But	since	these	groups
come	together	in	full	public	knowledge	and	are	in	harmony	with	the	time,	all	selfish	separatist	tendencies
are	 excluded,	 and	 no	 mistake	 is	 made.	 The	 idea	 of	 RETURN	 is	 based	 on	 the	 course	 of	 nature.	 The
movement	 is	 cyclic,	 and	 the	 course	 completes	 itself.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 not	 necessary	 to	 hasten	 anything
artificially.	Everything	comes	of	itself	at	the	appointed	time.	This	is	the	meaning	of	heaven	and	earth.

All	movements	are	accomplished	in	six	stages,	and	the	seventh	brings	return.	Thus	the	winter	solstice,
with	which	the	decline	of	the	year	begins,	comes	in	the	seventh	month	after	the	summer	solstice;	so	too
sunrise	comes	in	the	seventh	double	hour	after	sunset.	Therefore	seven	is	the	number	of	the	young	light,
and	it	arises	when	six,	the	number	of	the	great	darkness,	is	increased	by	one.	In	this	way	the	state	of	rest
gives	place	to	movement.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	within	the	earth:
The	image	of	THE	TURNING	POINT.
Thus	the	kings	of	antiquity	closed	the	passes
At	the	time	of	solstice.
Merchants	and	strangers	did	not	go	about,
And	the	ruler
Did	not	travel	through	the	provinces.

The	winter	solstice	has	always	been	celebrated	in	China	as	the	resting	time	of	the	year—a	custom	that
survives	in	the	time	of	rest	observed	at	the	new	year.	In	winter	the	life	energy,	symbolized	by	thunder,	the
Arousing,	 is	 still	underground.	Movement	 is	 just	at	 its	beginning;	 therefore	 it	must	be	strengthened	by
rest,	so	that	it	will	not	be	dissipated	by	being	used	prematurely.	This	principle,	i.e.,	of	allowing	energy	that
is	 renewing	 itself	 to	 be	 reinforced	 by	 rest,	 applies	 to	 all	 similar	 situations.	 The	 return	 of	 health	 after
illness,	the	return	of	understanding	after	an	estrangement:	everything	must	be	treated	tenderly	and	with
care	at	the	beginning,	so	that	the	return	may	lead	to	a	flowering.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Return	from	a	short	distance.
No	need	for	remorse.
Great	good	fortune.

Slight	digressions	from	the	good	cannot	be	avoided,	but	one	must	turn	back	in	time,	before	going	too
far.	This	 is	especially	 important	 in	 the	development	of	character;	every	 faintly	evil	 thought	must	be	put
aside	immediately,	before	it	goes	too	far	and	takes	root	in	the	mind.	Then	there	is	no	cause	for	remorse,
and	all	goes	well.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Quiet	return.	Good	fortune.

Return	always	calls	 for	a	decision	and	 is	an	act	of	self-mastery.	 It	 is	made	easier	 if	a	man	is	 in	good
company.	 If	he	can	bring	himself	 to	put	aside	pride	and	 follow	 the	example	of	good	men,	good	 fortune
results.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Repeated	return.	Danger.	No	blame.

There	are	people	of	a	certain	inner	instability	who	feel	a	constant	urge	to	reverse	themselves.	There	is
danger	 in	continually	deserting	 the	good	because	of	uncontrolled	desires,	 then	turning	back	 to	 it	again
because	 of	 a	 better	 resolution.	 However,	 since	 this	 does	 not	 lead	 to	 habituation	 in	 evil,	 a	 general
inclination	to	overcome	the	defect	is	not	wholly	excluded.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Walking	in	the	midst	of	others,



One	returns	alone.
A	man	is	in	a	society	composed	of	inferior	people,	but	is	connected	spiritually	with	a	strong	and	good

friend,	 and	 this	 makes	 him	 turn	 back	 alone.	 Although	 nothing	 is	 said	 of	 reward	 and	 punishment,	 this
return	is	certainly	favorable,	for	such	a	resolve	to	choose	the	good	brings	its	own	reward.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Noblehearted	return.	No	remorse.

When	the	time	for	return	has	come,	a	man	should	not	take	shelter	in	trivial	excuses,	but	should	look
within	and	examine	himself.	And	if	he	has	done	something	wrong	he	should	make	a	noblehearted	resolve
to	confess	his	fault.	No	one	will	regret	having	taken	this	road.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Missing	the	return.	Misfortune.
Misfortune	from	within	and	without.
If	armies	are	set	marching	in	this	way,
One	will	in	the	end	suffer	a	great	defeat,
Disastrous	for	the	ruler	of	the	country.
For	ten	years
It	will	not	be	possible	to	attack	again.

If	a	man	misses	the	right	time	for	return,	he	meets	with	misfortune.	The	misfortune	has	its	inner	cause
in	a	wrong	attitude	 toward	 the	world.	The	misfortune	coming	upon	him	 from	without	 results	 from	 this
wrong	attitude.	What	is	pictured	here	is	blind	obstinacy	and	the	judgment	that	is	visited	upon	it.



25.	Wu	Wang	/	Innocence	(The	Unexpected)

Ch’ien,	heaven,	is	above;	Chên,	movement,	is	below.	The	lower	trigram	Chên	is	under	the	influence	of
the	strong	line	it	has	received	from	above,	from	heaven.	When,	in	accord	with	this,	movement	follows	the
law	of	heaven,	man	is	innocent	and	without	guile.	His	mind	is	natural	and	true,	unshadowed	by	reflection
or	ulterior	designs.	For	wherever	conscious	purpose	is	to	be	seen,	there	the	truth	and	innocence	of	nature
have	been	 lost.	Nature	that	 is	not	directed	by	the	spirit	 is	not	 true	but	degenerate	nature.	Starting	out
with	the	idea	of	the	natural,	the	train	of	thought	 in	part	goes	somewhat	further	and	thus	the	hexagram
includes	also	the	idea	of	the	unintentional	or	unexpected.

THE	JUDGMENT
INNOCENCE.	Supreme	success.
Perseverance	furthers.
If	someone	is	not	as	he	should	be,
He	has	misfortune,
And	it	does	not	further	him
To	undertake	anything.

Man	has	received	from	heaven	a	nature	innately	good,	to	guide	him	in	all	his	movements.	By	devotion
to	 this	 divine	 spirit	 within	 himself,	 he	 attains	 an	 unsullied	 innocence	 that	 leads	 him	 to	 do	 right	 with
instinctive	sureness	and	without	any	ulterior	thought	of	reward	and	personal	advantage.	This	instinctive
certainty	brings	 about	 supreme	 success	 and	 “furthers	 through	perseverance.”	However,	 not	 everything
instinctive	is	nature	in	this	higher	sense	of	the	word,	but	only	that	which	is	right	and	in	accord	with	the
will	 of	 heaven.	Without	 this	 quality	 of	 rightness,	 an	 unreflecting,	 instinctive	way	 of	 acting	 brings	 only
misfortune.	Confucius	says	about	this:	“He	who	departs	from	innocence,	what	does	he	come	to?	Heaven’s
will	and	blessing	do	not	go	with	his	deeds.”

THE	IMAGE
Under	heaven	thunder	rolls:
All	things	attain	the	natural	state	of	innocence.
Thus	the	kings	of	old,
Rich	in	virtue,	and	in	harmony	with	the	time,
Fostered	and	nourished	all	beings.

In	springtime	when	thunder,	life	energy,	begins	to	move	again	under	the	heavens,	everything	sprouts
and	 grows,	 and	 all	 beings	 receive	 from	 the	 creative	 activity	 of	 nature	 the	 childlike	 innocence	 of	 their
original	state.	So	it	is	with	the	good	rulers	of	mankind:	drawing	on	the	spiritual	wealth	at	their	command,
they	take	care	of	all	forms	of	life	and	all	forms	of	culture	and	do	everything	to	further	them,	and	at	the
proper	time.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Innocent	behavior	brings	good	fortune.

The	original	impulses	of	the	heart	are	always	good,	so	that	we	may	follow	them	confidently,	assured	of
good	fortune	and	achievement	of	our	aims.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
If	one	does	not	count	on	the	harvest	while	plowing,
Nor	on	the	use	of	the	ground	while	clearing	it,
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.

We	should	do	every	task	for	its	own	sake	as	time	and	place	demand	and	not	with	an	eye	to	the	result.
Then	each	task	turns	out	well,	and	anything	we	undertake	succeeds.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Undeserved	misfortune.
The	cow	that	was	tethered	by	someone
Is	the	wanderer’s	gain,	the	citizen’s	loss.

Sometimes	undeserved	misfortune	befalls	a	man	at	the	hands	of	another,	as	for	instance	when	someone
passes	by	and	takes	a	tethered	cow	along	with	him.	His	gain	 is	the	owner’s	 loss.	 In	all	 transactions,	no
matter	how	innocent,	we	must	accommodate	ourselves	to	the	demands	of	the	time,	otherwise	unexpected
misfortune	overtakes	us.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	who	can	be	persevering
Remains	without	blame.

We	cannot	lose	what	really	belongs	to	us,	even	if	we	throw	it	away.	Therefore	we	need	have	no	anxiety.
All	that	need	concern	us	is	that	we	should	remain	true	to	our	own	natures	and	not	listen	to	others.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Use	no	medicine	in	an	illness
Incurred	through	no	fault	of	your	own.
It	will	pass	of	itself.



An	unexpected	evil	may	come	accidentally	from	without.	If	it	does	not	originate	in	one’s	own	nature	or
have	 a	 foothold	 there,	 one	 should	 not	 resort	 to	 external	 means	 to	 eradicate	 it,	 but	 should	 quietly	 let
nature	take	its	course.	Then	improvement	will	come	of	itself.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Innocent	action	brings	misfortune.
Nothing	furthers.

When,	 in	 a	 given	 situation,	 the	 time	 is	 not	 ripe	 for	 further	 progress,	 the	 best	 thing	 to	 do	 is	 to	wait
quietly,	without	ulterior	designs.	 If	one	acts	 thoughtlessly	and	tries	 to	push	ahead	 in	opposition	to	 fate,
success	will	not	be	achieved.



26.	Ta	Ch’u	/	The	Taming	Power	of	the	Great

The	Creative	is	tamed	by	Kên,	Keeping	Still.	This	produces	great	power,	a	situation	in	contrast	to	that
of	the	ninth	hexagram,	Hsiao	Ch’u,	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL,	in	which	the	Creative	is	tamed
by	 the	 Gentle	 alone.	 There	 one	 weak	 line	 must	 tame	 five	 strong	 lines,	 but	 here	 four	 strong	 lines	 are
restrained	 by	 two	 weak	 lines;	 in	 addition	 to	 a	 minister,	 there	 is	 a	 prince,	 and	 the	 restraining	 power
therefore	is	far	stronger.

The	 hexagram	 has	 a	 threefold	 meaning,	 expressing	 different	 aspects	 of	 the	 concept	 “holding	 firm.”
Heaven	within	the	mountain	gives	the	idea	of	holding	firm	in	the	sense	of	holding	together;	the	trigram
Kên,	which	holds	the	trigram	Ch’ien	still,	gives	the	idea	of	holding	firm	in	the	sense	of	holding	back;	the
third	idea	is	that	of	holding	firm	in	the	sense	of	caring	for	and	nourishing.	This	last	is	suggested	by	the
fact	that	a	strong	line	at	the	top,	which	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	is	honored	and	tended	as	a	sage.	The
third	of	these	meanings	also	attaches	specifically	to	this	strong	line	at	the	top,	which	represents	the	sage.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.
Perseverance	furthers.
Not	eating	at	home	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.

To	hold	firmly	to	great	creative	powers	and	store	them	up,	as	set	forth	in	this	hexagram,	there	is	need
of	a	strong,	clearheaded	man	who	 is	honored	by	the	ruler.	The	trigram	Ch’ien	points	 to	strong	creative
power;	 Kên	 indicates	 firmness	 and	 truth.	 Both	 point	 to	 light	 and	 clarity	 and	 to	 the	 daily	 renewal	 of
character.	Only	through	such	daily	self-renewal	can	a	man	continue	at	the	height	of	his	powers.	Force	of
habit	 helps	 to	 keep	 order	 in	 quiet	 times;	 but	 in	 periods	 when	 there	 is	 a	 great	 storing	 up	 of	 energy,
everything	 depends	 on	 the	 power	 of	 the	 personality.	 However,	 since	 the	 worthy	 are	 honored,	 as	 in	 the
case	of	the	strong	personality	entrusted	with	leadership	by	the	ruler,	it	is	an	advantage	not	to	eat	at	home
but	 rather	 to	earn	one’s	bread	by	entering	upon	public	office.	Such	a	man	 is	 in	harmony	with	heaven;
therefore	even	great	and	difficult	undertakings,	such	as	crossing	the	great	water,	succeed.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	within	the	mountain:
The	image	of	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF
THE	GREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man	acquaints	himself	with	many	sayings	of	antiquity
And	many	deeds	of	the	past,
In	order	to	strengthen	his	character	thereby.

Heaven	within	the	mountain	points	to	hidden	treasures.	In	the	words	and	deeds	of	the	past	there	lies
hidden	a	treasure	that	men	may	use	to	strengthen	and	elevate	their	own	characters.	The	way	to	study	the
past	is	not	to	confine	oneself	to	mere	knowledge	of	history	but,	through	application	of	this	knowledge,	to
give	actuality	to	the	past.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Danger	is	at	hand.	It	furthers	one	to	desist.

A	man	wishes	to	make	vigorous	advance,	but	circumstances	present	an	obstacle.	He	sees	himself	held
back	firmly.	 If	he	should	attempt	to	 force	an	advance,	 it	would	 lead	him	into	misfortune.	Therefore	 it	 is
better	 for	 him	 to	 compose	 himself	 and	 to	 wait	 until	 an	 outlet	 is	 offered	 for	 release	 of	 his	 stored-up
energies.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
The	axletrees	are	taken	from	the	wagon.

Here	 advance	 is	 checked	 just	 as	 in	 the	 third	 line	 of	 THE	 TAMING	 POWER	 OF	 THE	 SMALL	 (9).
However,	in	the	latter	the	restraining	force	is	slight;	thus	a	conflict	arises	between	the	propulsive	and	the
restraining	 movement,	 as	 a	 result	 of	 which	 the	 spokes	 fall	 out	 of	 the	 wagon	 wheels,	 while	 here	 the
restraining	 force	 is	 absolutely	 superior;	 hence	 no	 struggle	 takes	 place.	 One	 submits	 and	 removes	 the
axletrees	from	the	wagon—in	other	words,	contents	himself	with	waiting.	In	this	way	energy	accumulates
for	a	vigorous	advance	later	on.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
A	good	horse	that	follows	others.
Awareness	of	danger,
With	perseverance,	furthers.
Practice	chariot	driving	and	armed	defense	daily.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.

The	way	opens;	the	hindrance	has	been	cleared	away.	A	man	is	in	contact	with	a	strong	will	acting	in
the	same	direction	as	his	own,	and	goes	forward	like	one	good	horse	following	another.	But	danger	still
threatens,	and	he	must	remain	aware	of	it,	or	he	will	be	robbed	of	his	firmness.	Thus	he	must	acquire	skill
on	 the	 one	 hand	 in	 what	 will	 take	 him	 forward,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 in	 what	 will	 protect	 him	 against



unforeseen	attacks.	It	is	good	in	such	a	pass	to	have	a	goal	toward	which	to	strive.
Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	headboard	of	a	young	bull.
Great	good	fortune.

This	line	and	the	one	following	it	are	the	two	that	tame	the	forward-pushing	lower	lines.	Before	a	bull’s
horns	grow	out,	a	headboard	is	fastened	to	its	forehead,	so	that	later	when	the	horns	appear	they	cannot
do	harm.	A	good	way	to	restrain	wild	force	is	to	forestall	it.	By	so	doing	one	achieves	an	easy	and	a	great
success.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	tusk	of	a	gelded	boar.
Good	fortune.

Here	the	restraining	of	the	impetuous	forward	drive	is	achieved	in	an	indirect	way.	A	boar’s	tusk	is	in
itself	dangerous,	but	if	the	boar’s	nature	is	altered,	the	tusk	is	no	longer	a	menace.	Thus	also	where	men
are	concerned,	wild	force	should	not	be	combated	directly;	instead,	its	roots	should	be	eradicated.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
One	attains	the	way	of	heaven.	Success.

The	 time	 of	 obstruction	 is	 past.	 The	 energy	 long	 dammed	 up	 by	 inhibition	 forces	 its	 way	 out	 and
achieves	great	success.	This	refers	to	a	man	who	is	honored	by	the	ruler	and	whose	principles	now	prevail
and	shape	the	world.



27.	I	/	The	Corners	of	the	Mouth

This	 hexagram	 is	 a	 picture	 of	 an	 open	mouth;	 above	 and	 below	 are	 the	 firm	 lines	 of	 the	 lips,	 and
between	 them	 the	opening.	Starting	with	 the	mouth,	 through	which	we	 take	 food	 for	nourishment,	 the
thought	leads	to	nourishment	itself.	Nourishment	of	oneself,	specifically	of	the	body,	is	represented	in	the
three	 lower	 lines,	 while	 the	 three	 upper	 lines	 represent	 nourishment	 and	 care	 of	 others,	 in	 a	 higher,
spiritual	sense.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Pay	heed	to	the	providing	of	nourishment
And	to	what	a	man	seeks
To	fill	his	own	mouth	with.

In	bestowing	care	and	nourishment,	it	is	important	that	the	right	people	should	be	taken	care	of	and
that	we	should	attend	to	our	own	nourishment	in	the	right	way.	If	we	wish	to	know	what	anyone	is	like,	we
have	only	 to	observe	on	whom	he	bestows	his	care	and	what	sides	of	his	own	nature	he	cultivates	and
nourishes.	Nature	nourishes	all	creatures.	The	great	man	fosters	and	takes	care	of	superior	men,	in	order
to	take	care	of	all	men	through	them.	Mencius	says	about	this:

If	we	wish	to	know	whether	anyone	is	superior	or	not,	we	need	only	observe	what	part	of	his	being	he
regards	as	especially	important.	The	body	has	superior	and	inferior,	important	and	unimportant	parts.	We
must	not	injure	important	parts	for	the	sake	of	the	unimportant,	nor	must	we	injure	the	superior	parts	for
the	 sake	 of	 the	 inferior.	He	who	 cultivates	 the	 inferior	 parts	 of	 his	 nature	 is	 an	 inferior	man.	He	who
cultivates	the	superior	parts	of	his	nature	is	a	superior	man.1

THE	IMAGE
At	the	foot	of	the	mountain,	thunder:
The	image	of	PROVIDING
NOURISHMENT.
Thus	the	superior	man	is	careful	of	his	words
And	temperate	in	eating	and	drinking.

“God	comes	forth	in	the	sign	of	the	Arousing”2:	when	in	the	spring	the	life	forces	stir	again,	all	things
come	into	being	anew.	“He	brings	to	perfection	in	the	sign	of	Keeping	Still”:	thus	in	the	early	spring,	when
the	 seeds	 fall	 to	 earth,	 all	 things	 are	made	 ready.	 This	 is	 an	 image	 of	 providing	 nourishment	 through
movement	and	tranquillity.	The	superior	man	takes	it	as	a	pattern	for	the	nourishment	and	cultivation	of
his	 character.	Words	 are	 a	movement	 going	 from	within	 outward.	 Eating	 and	 drinking	 are	movements
from	without	inward.	Both	kinds	of	movement	can	be	modified	by	tranquillity.	For	tranquillity	keeps	the
words	that	come	out	of	the	mouth	from	exceeding	proper	measure,	and	keeps	the	food	that	goes	into	the
mouth	from	exceeding	its	proper	measure.	Thus	character	is	cultivated.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
You	let	your	magic	tortoise	go,
And	look	at	me	with	the	corners	of	your	mouth	drooping.
Misfortune.

The	magic	tortoise	is	a	creature	possessed	of	such	supernatural	powers	that	it	lives	on	air	and	needs
no	 earthly	 nourishment.	 The	 image	means	 that	 a	man	 fitted	 by	 nature	 and	 position	 to	 live	 freely	 and
independently	renounces	this	self-reliance	and	instead	looks	with	envy	and	discontent	at	others	who	are
outwardly	 in	 better	 circumstances.	 But	 such	 base	 envy	 only	 arouses	 derision	 and	 contempt	 in	 those
others.	This	has	bad	results.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Turning	to	the	summit	for	nourishment,
Deviating	from	the	path
To	seek	nourishment	from	the	hill.
Continuing	to	do	this	brings	misfortune.

Normally	a	person	either	provides	his	own	means	of	nourishment	or	is	supported	in	a	proper	way	by
those	whose	 duty	 and	 privilege	 it	 is	 to	 provide	 for	 him.	 If,	 owing	 to	weakness	 of	 spirit,	 a	man	 cannot
support	 himself,	 a	 feeling	 of	 uneasiness	 comes	over	him;	 this	 is	 because	 in	 shirking	 the	proper	way	of
obtaining	a	 living,	he	accepts	support	as	a	 favor	 from	those	 in	higher	place.	This	 is	unworthy,	 for	he	 is
deviating	from	his	true	nature.	Kept	up	indefinitely,	this	course	leads	to	misfortune.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Turning	away	from	nourishment.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
Do	not	act	thus	for	ten	years.
Nothing	serves	to	further.

He	who	seeks	nourishment	that	does	not	nourish	reels	from	desire	to	gratification	and	in	gratification



craves	desire.	Mad	pursuit	of	pleasure	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	senses	never	brings	one	to	the	goal.	One
should	never	(ten	years	is	a	complete	cycle	of	time)	follow	this	path,	for	nothing	good	can	come	of	it.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Turning	to	the	summit
For	provision	of	nourishment
Brings	good	fortune.
Spying	about	with	sharp	eyes
Like	a	tiger	with	insatiable	craving.
No	blame.

In	contrast	to	the	six	in	the	second	place,	which	refers	to	a	man	bent	exclusively	on	his	own	advantage,
this	line	refers	to	one	occupying	a	high	position	and	striving	to	let	his	light	shine	forth.	To	do	this	he	needs
helpers,	because	he	cannot	attain	his	lofty	aim	alone.	With	the	greed	of	a	hungry	tiger	he	is	on	the	lookout
for	the	right	people.	Since	he	is	not	working	for	himself	but	for	the	good	of	all,	there	is	no	wrong	in	such
zeal.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Turning	away	from	the	path.
To	remain	persevering	brings	good	fortune.
One	should	not	cross	the	great	water.

A	man	may	be	conscious	of	a	deficiency	in	himself.	He	should	be	undertaking	the	nourishment	of	the
people,	but	he	has	not	the	strength	to	do	it.	Thus	he	must	turn	from	his	accustomed	path	and	beg	counsel
and	help	 from	a	man	who	 is	 spiritually	his	 superior	but	undistinguished	outwardly.	 If	he	maintains	 this
attitude	 of	 mind	 perseveringly,	 success	 and	 good	 fortune	 are	 his.	 But	 he	 must	 remain	 aware	 of	 his
dependence.	He	must	not	put	his	own	person	forward	nor	attempt	great	labors,	such	as	crossing	the	great
water.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	source	of	nourishment.
Awareness	of	danger	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.

This	describes	a	sage	of	the	highest	order,	from	whom	emanate	all	influences	that	provide	nourishment
for	others.	Such	a	position	brings	with	it	heavy	responsibility.	If	he	remains	conscious	of	this	fact,	he	has
good	 fortune	and	may	confidently	undertake	even	great	and	difficult	 labors,	 such	as	crossing	 the	great
water.	These	undertakings	bring	general	happiness	for	him	and	for	all	others.



28.	Ta	Kuo	/	Preponderance	of	the	Great

This	hexagram	consists	of	 four	 strong	 lines	 inside	and	 two	weak	 lines	outside.	When	 the	 strong	are
outside	and	the	weak	inside,	all	is	well	and	there	is	nothing	out	of	balance,	nothing	extraordinary	in	the
situation.	Here,	 however,	 the	 opposite	 is	 the	 case.	 The	 hexagram	 represents	 a	 beam	 that	 is	 thick	 and
heavy	 in	 the	middle	but	 too	weak	at	 the	ends.	This	 is	a	condition	 that	cannot	 last;	 it	must	be	changed,
must	pass,	or	misfortune	will	result.

THE	JUDGMENT
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.
The	ridgepole	sags	to	the	breaking	point.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
Success.

The	 weight	 of	 the	 great	 is	 excessive.	 The	 load	 is	 too	 heavy	 for	 the	 strength	 of	 the	 supports.	 The
ridgepole,	on	which	the	whole	roof	rests,	sags	to	the	breaking	point,	because	its	supporting	ends	are	too
weak	for	the	load	they	bear.	It	is	an	exceptional	time	and	situation;	therefore	extraordinary	measures	are
demanded.	 It	 is	 necessary	 to	 find	 a	 way	 of	 transition	 as	 quickly	 as	 possible,	 and	 to	 take	 action.	 This
promises	success.	For	although	the	strong	element	is	in	excess,	it	is	in	the	middle,	that	is,	at	the	center	of
gravity,	 so	 that	 a	 revolution	 is	 not	 to	 be	 feared.	 Nothing	 is	 to	 be	 achieved	 by	 forcible	 measures.	 The
problem	must	 be	 solved	 by	 gentle	 penetration	 to	 the	meaning	 of	 the	 situation	 (as	 is	 suggested	 by	 the
attribute	 of	 the	 inner	 trigram,	 Sun);	 then	 the	 change-over	 to	 other	 conditions	 will	 be	 successful.	 It
demands	real	superiority;	therefore	the	time	when	the	great	preponderates	is	a	momentous	time.

THE	IMAGE
The	lake	rises	above	the	trees:
The	image	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF
THE	GREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man,	when	he	stands	alone,
Is	unconcerned,
And	if	he	has	to	renounce	the	world,
He	is	undaunted.

Extraordinary	 times	when	 the	 great	 preponderates	 are	 like	 floodtimes	when	 the	 lake	 rises	 over	 the
treetops.	 But	 such	 conditions	 are	 temporary.	 The	 two	 trigrams	 indicate	 the	 attitude	 proper	 to	 such
exceptional	 times:	 the	 symbol	 of	 the	 trigram	Sun	 is	 the	 tree,	which	 stands	 firm	 even	 though	 it	 stands
alone,	and	the	attribute	of	Tui	is	joyousness,	which	remains	undaunted	even	if	it	must	renounce	the	world.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
To	spread	white	rushes	underneath.
No	blame.

When	 a	 man	 wishes	 to	 undertake	 an	 enterprise	 in	 extraordinary	 times,	 he	 must	 be	 extraordinarily
cautious,	just	as	when	setting	a	heavy	thing	down	on	the	floor,	one	takes	care	to	put	rushes	under	it,	so
that	 nothing	 will	 break.	 This	 caution,	 though	 it	 may	 seem	 exaggerated,	 is	 not	 a	 mistake.	 Exceptional
enterprises	cannot	succeed	unless	utmost	caution	is	observed	in	their	beginnings	and	in	the	laying	of	their
foundations.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
A	dry	poplar	sprouts	at	the	root.
An	older	man	takes	a	young	wife.
Everything	furthers.

Wood	 is	 near	 water;	 hence	 the	 image	 of	 an	 old	 poplar	 sprouting	 at	 the	 root.	 This	 means	 an
extraordinary	reanimation	of	the	processes	of	growth.	In	the	same	way,	an	extraordinary	situation	arises
when	an	older	man	marries	a	young	girl	who	suits	him.	Despite	the	unusualness	of	the	situation,	all	goes
well.

From	the	point	of	view	of	politics,	the	meaning	is	that	in	exceptional	times	one	does	well	to	join	with
the	lowly,	for	this	affords	a	possibility	of	renewal.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	ridgepole	sags	to	the	breaking	point.
Misfortune.

This	indicates	a	type	of	man	who	in	times	of	preponderance	of	the	great	insists	on	pushing	ahead.	He
accepts	no	advice	from	others,	and	therefore	they	in	turn	are	not	willing	to	lend	him	support.	Because	of
this	the	burden	grows,	until	the	structure	of	things	bends	or	breaks.	Plunging	willfully	ahead	in	times	of
danger	only	hastens	the	catastrophe.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	ridgepole	is	braced.	Good	fortune.
If	there	are	ulterior	motives,	it	is	humiliating.

Through	friendly	relations	with	people	of	lower	rank,	a	responsible	man	succeeds	in	becoming	master



of	the	situation.	But	if,	instead	of	working	for	the	rescue	of	the	whole,	he	were	to	misuse	his	connections
to	obtain	personal	power	and	success,	it	would	lead	to	humiliation.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
A	withered	poplar	puts	forth	flowers.
An	older	woman	takes	a	husband.
No	blame.	No	praise.

A	withered	poplar	that	flowers	exhausts	its	energies	thereby	and	only	hastens	its	end.	An	older	woman
may	 marry	 once	 more,	 but	 no	 renewal	 takes	 place.	 Everything	 remains	 barren.	 Thus,	 though	 all	 the
amenities	are	observed,	the	net	result	is	only	the	anomaly	of	the	situation.

Applied	 to	politics,	 the	metaphor	means	 that	 if	 in	 times	of	 insecurity	we	give	up	alliance	with	 those
below	us	and	keep	up	only	the	relationships	we	have	with	people	of	higher	rank,	an	unstable	situation	is
created.

Six	at	the	top	means:
One	must	go	through	the	water.
It	goes	over	one’s	head.
Misfortune.	No	blame.

Here	 is	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 the	 unusual	 has	 reached	 a	 climax.	 One	 is	 courageous	 and	 wishes	 to
accomplish	one’s	task,	no	matter	what	happens.	This	leads	into	danger.	The	water	rises	over	one’s	head.
This	 is	 the	misfortune.	But	one	 incurs	no	blame	 in	giving	up	one’s	 life	 that	 the	good	and	the	right	may
prevail.	There	are	things	that	are	more	important	than	life.



29.	K’an	/	The	Abysmal	(Water)

This	hexagram	consists	of	a	doubling	of	 the	 trigram	K’an.	 It	 is	one	of	 the	eight	hexagrams	 in	which
doubling	occurs.	The	trigram	K’an	means	a	plunging	in.	A	yang	line	has	plunged	in	between	two	yin	lines
and	is	closed	in	by	them	like	water	in	a	ravine.	The	trigram	K’an	is	also	the	middle	son.	The	Receptive	has
obtained	 the	middle	 line	of	 the	Creative,	 and	 thus	K’an	develops.	As	 an	 image	 it	 represents	water,	 the
water	 that	 comes	 from	above	and	 is	 in	motion	on	earth	 in	 streams	and	 rivers,	giving	 rise	 to	all	 life	on
earth.
In	man’s	world	K’an	 represents	 the	 heart,	 the	 soul	 locked	up	within	 the	 body,	 the	 principle	 of	 light

inclosed	in	the	dark—that	is,	reason.	The	name	of	the	hexagram,	because	the	trigram	is	doubled,	has	the
additional	 meaning,	 “repetition	 of	 danger.”	 Thus	 the	 hexagram	 is	 intended	 to	 designate	 an	 objective
situation	to	which	one	must	become	accustomed,	not	a	subjective	attitude.	For	danger	due	to	a	subjective
attitude	 means	 either	 foolhardiness	 or	 guile.	 Hence	 too	 a	 ravine	 is	 used	 to	 symbolize	 danger;	 it	 is	 a
situation	in	which	a	man	is	in	the	same	pass	as	the	water	in	a	ravine,	and,	like	the	water,	he	can	escape	if
he	behaves	correctly.

THE	JUDGMENT
The	Abysmal	repeated.
If	you	are	sincere,	you	have	success	in	your	heart,
And	whatever	you	do	succeeds.

Through	repetition	of	danger	we	grow	accustomed	to	it.	Water	sets	the	example	for	the	right	conduct
under	such	circumstances.	It	flows	on	and	on,	and	merely	fills	up	all	the	places	through	which	it	flows;	it
does	 not	 shrink	 from	 any	 dangerous	 spot	 nor	 from	 any	 plunge,	 and	 nothing	 can	make	 it	 lose	 its	 own
essential	 nature.	 It	 remains	 true	 to	 itself	 under	 all	 conditions.	 Thus	 likewise,	 if	 one	 is	 sincere	 when
confronted	 with	 difficulties,	 the	 heart	 can	 penetrate	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 situation.	 And	 once	 we	 have
gained	inner	mastery	of	a	problem,	it	will	come	about	naturally	that	the	action	we	take	will	succeed.	In
danger	all	that	counts	is	really	carrying	out	all	that	has	to	be	done—thoroughness—and	going	forward,	in
order	not	to	perish	through	tarrying	in	the	danger.
Properly	used,	danger	can	have	an	 important	meaning	as	a	protective	measure.	Thus	heaven	has	 its

perilous	height	protecting	it	against	every	attempt	at	invasion,	and	earth	has	its	mountains	and	bodies	of
water,	separating	countries	by	their	dangers.	Thus	also	rulers	make	use	of	danger	to	protect	themselves
against	attacks	from	without	and	against	turmoil	within.

THE	IMAGE
Water	flows	on	uninterruptedly	and	reaches	its	goal:
The	image	of	the	Abysmal	repeated.
Thus	the	superior	man	walks	in	lasting	virtue
And	carries	on	the	business	of	teaching.

Water	 reaches	 its	 goal	 by	 flowing	 continually.	 It	 fills	 up	 every	 depression	 before	 it	 flows	 on.	 The
superior	man	 follows	 its	 example;	 he	 is	 concerned	 that	 goodness	 should	 be	 an	 established	 attribute	 of
character	 rather	 than	an	accidental	 and	 isolated	occurrence.	So	 likewise	 in	 teaching	others	 everything
depends	on	consistency,	for	it	is	only	through	repetition	that	the	pupil	makes	the	material	his	own.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Repetition	of	the	Abysmal.
In	the	abyss	one	falls	into	a	pit.
Misfortune.

By	growing	used	to	what	is	dangerous,	a	man	can	easily	allow	it	to	become	part	of	him.	He	is	familiar
with	it	and	grows	used	to	evil.	With	this	he	has	lost	the	right	way,	and	misfortune	is	the	natural	result.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
The	abyss	is	dangerous.
One	should	strive	to	attain	small	things	only.

When	 we	 are	 in	 danger	 we	 ought	 not	 to	 attempt	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 immediately,	 regardless	 of
circumstances;	at	first	we	must	content	ourselves	with	not	being	overcome	by	it.	We	must	calmly	weigh
the	conditions	of	the	time	and	be	satisfied	with	small	gains,	because	for	the	time	being	a	great	success
cannot	be	attained.	A	spring	flows	only	sparingly	at	first,	and	tarries	for	some	time	before	it	makes	its	way
into	the	open.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Forward	and	backward,	abyss	on	abyss.
In	danger	like	this,	pause	at	first	and	wait,
Otherwise	you	will	fall	into	a	pit	in	the	abyss.
Do	not	act	in	this	way.

Here	every	step,	forward	or	backward,	leads	into	danger.	Escape	is	out	of	the	question.	Therefore	we
must	not	be	misled	 into	action,	 as	 a	 result	 of	which	we	 should	only	bog	down	deeper	 into	 the	danger;
disagreeable	as	it	may	be	to	remain	in	such	a	situation,	we	must	wait	until	a	way	out	shows	itself.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:



A	jug	of	wine,	a	bowl	of	rice1	with	it;
Earthen	vessels
Simply	handed	in	through	the	window.
There	is	certainly	no	blame	in	this.

In	times	of	danger	ceremonious	forms	are	dropped.	What	matters	most	is	sincerity.	Although	as	a	rule
it	 is	 customary	 for	 an	 official	 to	 present	 certain	 introductory	 gifts	 and	 recommendations	 before	 he	 is
appointed,	 here	 everything	 is	 simplified	 to	 the	 utmost.	 The	 gifts	 are	 insignificant,	 there	 is	 no	 one	 to
sponsor	 him,	 he	 introduces	 himself;	 yet	 all	 this	 need	 not	 be	 humiliating	 if	 only	 there	 is	 the	 honest
intention	of	mutual	help	in	danger.
Still	 another	 idea	 is	 suggested.	 The	window	 is	 the	 place	 through	which	 light	 enters	 the	 room.	 If	 in

difficult	times	we	want	to	enlighten	someone,	we	must	begin	with	that	which	is	in	itself	lucid	and	proceed
quite	simply	from	that	point	on.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	abyss	is	not	filled	to	overflowing,
It	is	filled	only	to	the	rim.
No	blame.

Danger	comes	because	one	is	too	ambitious.	In	order	to	flow	out	of	a	ravine,	water	does	not	rise	higher
than	the	lowest	point	of	the	rim.	So	likewise	a	man	when	in	danger	has	only	to	proceed	along	the	line	of
least	resistance;	thus	he	reaches	the	goal.	Great	labors	cannot	be	accomplished	in	such	times;	it	is	enough
to	get	out	of	the	danger.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Bound	with	cords	and	ropes,
Shut	in	between	thorn-hedged	prison	walls:
For	three	years	one	does	not	find	the	way.
Misfortune.

A	man	who	in	the	extremity	of	danger	has	lost	the	right	way	and	is	irremediably	entangled	in	his	sins
has	no	prospect	of	escape.	He	is	like	a	criminal	who	sits	shackled	behind	thorn-hedged	prison	walls.



30.	Li	/	The	Clinging,	Fire

This	 hexagram	 is	 another	 double	 sign.	 The	 trigram	 Li	 means,	 “to	 cling	 to	 something,”	 “to	 be
conditioned,”	 “to	 depend	 or	 rest	 on	 something,”	 and	 also	 “brightness.”	 A	 dark	 line	 clings	 to	 two	 light
lines,	one	above	and	one	below—the	image	of	an	empty	space	between	two	strong	lines,	whereby	the	two
strong	lines	are	made	bright.	The	trigram	represents	the	middle	daughter.	The	Creative	has	incorporated
the	central	line	of	the	Receptive,	and	thus	Li	develops.	As	an	image,	it	is	fire.	Fire	has	no	definite	form	but
clings	to	the	burning	object	and	thus	is	bright.	As	water	pours	down	from	heaven,	so	fire	flames	up	from
the	earth.	While	K’an	means	the	soul	shut	within	the	body,	Li	stands	for	nature	in	its	radiance.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CLINGING.	Perseverance	furthers.
It	brings	success.
Care	of	the	cow	brings	good	fortune.

What	 is	 dark	 clings	 to	what	 is	 light	 and	 so	 enhances	 the	 brightness	 of	 the	 latter.	 A	 luminous	 thing
giving	out	light	must	have	within	itself	something	that	perseveres;	otherwise	it	will	in	time	burn	itself	out.
Everything	that	gives	light	is	dependent	on	something	to	which	it	clings,	in	order	that	it	may	continue	to
shine.

Thus	sun	and	moon	cling	to	heaven,	and	grain,	grass,	and	trees	cling	to	the	earth.	So	too	the	twofold
clarity	of	the	dedicated	man	clings	to	what	is	right	and	thereby	can	shape	the	world.	Human	life	on	earth
is	conditioned	and	unfree,	and	when	man	recognizes	 this	 limitation	and	makes	himself	dependent	upon
the	 harmonious	 and	 beneficent	 forces	 of	 the	 cosmos,	 he	 achieves	 success.	 The	 cow	 is	 the	 symbol	 of
extreme	 docility.	 By	 cultivating	 in	 himself	 an	 attitude	 of	 compliance	 and	 voluntary	 dependence,	 man
acquires	clarity	without	sharpness	and	finds	his	place	in	the	world.1

THE	IMAGE
That	which	is	bright	rises	twice:
The	image	of	FIRE.
Thus	the	great	man,	by	perpetuating	this	brightness,
Illumines	the	four	quarters	of	the	world.

Each	of	 the	 two	 trigrams	 represents	 the	 sun	 in	 the	course	of	a	day.	The	 two	 together	 represent	 the
repeated	movement	of	 the	sun,	 the	 function	of	 light	with	 respect	 to	 time.	The	great	man	continues	 the
work	of	nature	in	the	human	world.	Through	the	clarity	of	his	nature	he	causes	the	light	to	spread	farther
and	farther	and	to	penetrate	the	nature	of	man	ever	more	deeply.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
The	footprints	run	crisscross.
If	one	is	seriously	intent,	no	blame.

It	is	early	morning	and	work	begins.	The	mind	has	been	closed	to	the	outside	world	in	sleep;	now	its
connections	with	the	world	begin	again.	The	traces	of	one’s	impressions	run	crisscross.	Activity	and	haste
prevail.	It	is	important	then	to	preserve	inner	composure	and	not	to	allow	oneself	to	be	swept	along	by	the
bustle	of	 life.	 If	 one	 is	 serious	and	composed,	he	can	acquire	 the	clarity	of	mind	needed	 for	 coming	 to
terms	 with	 the	 innumerable	 impressions	 that	 pour	 in.	 It	 is	 precisely	 at	 the	 beginning	 that	 serious
concentration	is	important,	because	the	beginning	holds	the	seed	of	all	that	is	to	follow.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Yellow	light.	Supreme	good	fortune.

Midday	has	come;	the	sun	shines	with	a	yellow	light.	Yellow	is	the	color	of	measure	and	mean.	Yellow
light	is	therefore	a	symbol	of	the	highest	culture	and	art,	whose	consummate	harmony	consists	in	holding
to	the	mean.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
In	the	light	of	the	setting	sun,
Men	either	beat	the	pot	and	sing
Or	loudly	bewail	the	approach	of	old	age.
Misfortune.

Here	 the	 end	 of	 the	 day	 has	 come.	 The	 light	 of	 the	 setting	 sun	 calls	 to	 mind	 the	 fact	 that	 life	 is
transitory	 and	 conditional.	 Caught	 in	 this	 external	 bondage,	 men	 are	 usually	 robbed	 of	 their	 inner
freedom	as	well.	The	sense	of	the	transitoriness	of	life	impels	them	to	uninhibited	revelry	in	order	to	enjoy
life	while	it	lasts,	or	else	they	yield	to	melancholy	and	spoil	the	precious	time	by	lamenting	the	approach
of	old	age.	Both	attitudes	are	wrong.	To	 the	superior	man	 it	makes	no	difference	whether	death	comes
early	or	late.	He	cultivates	himself,	awaits	his	allotted	time,	and	in	this	way	secures	his	fate.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Its	coming	is	sudden;
It	flames	up,	dies	down,	is	thrown	away.

Clarity	 of	 mind	 has	 the	 same	 relation	 to	 life	 that	 fire	 has	 to	 wood.	 Fire	 clings	 to	 wood,	 but	 also
consumes	it.	Clarity	of	mind	is	rooted	in	life	but	can	also	consume	it.	Everything	depends	upon	how	the
clarity	 functions.	Here	 the	 image	used	 is	 that	 of	 a	meteor	 or	 a	 straw	 fire.	A	man	who	 is	 excitable	 and



restless	may	rise	quickly	to	prominence	but	produces	no	lasting	effects.	Thus	matters	end	badly	when	a
man	spends	himself	too	rapidly	and	consumes	himself	like	a	meteor.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Tears	in	floods,	sighing	and	lamenting.
Good	fortune.

Here	 the	 zenith	 of	 life	 has	 been	 reached.	Were	 there	 no	warning,	 one	would	 at	 this	 point	 consume
oneself	like	a	flame.	Instead,	understanding	the	vanity	of	all	things,	one	may	put	aside	both	hope	and	fear,
and	sigh	and	 lament:	 if	 one	 is	 intent	on	 retaining	his	 clarity	of	mind,	good	 fortune	will	 come	 from	 this
grief.	For	here	we	are	dealing	not	with	a	passing	mood,	as	in	the	nine	in	the	third	place,	but	with	a	real
change	of	heart.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	king	uses	him	to	march	forth	and	chastise.
Then	it	is	best	to	kill	the	leaders
And	take	captive	the	followers.	No	blame.

It	is	not	the	purpose	of	chastisement	to	impose	punishment	blindly	but	to	create	discipline.	Evil	must
be	 cured	 at	 its	 roots.	 To	 eradicate	 evil	 in	 political	 life,	 it	 is	 best	 to	 kill	 the	 ringleaders	 and	 spare	 the
followers.	In	educating	oneself	it	is	best	to	root	out	bad	habits	and	tolerate	those	that	are	harmless.	For
asceticism	that	is	too	strict,	like	sentences	of	undue	severity,	fails	in	its	purpose.



PART	II



31.	Hsien	/	Influence	(Wooing)

The	name	of	the	hexagram	means	“universal,”	“general,”	and	in	a	figurative	sense	“to	influence,”	“to
stimulate.”	The	upper	trigram	is	Tui,	the	Joyous;	the	lower	is	Kên,	Keeping	Still.	By	its	persistent,	quiet
influence,	the	lower,	rigid	trigram	stimulates	the	upper,	weak	trigram,	which	responds	to	this	stimulation
cheerfully	 and	 joyously.	 Kên,	 the	 lower	 trigram,	 is	 the	 youngest	 son;	 the	 upper,	 Tui,	 is	 the	 youngest
daughter.	 Thus	 the	 universal	 mutual	 attraction	 between	 the	 sexes	 is	 represented.	 In	 courtship,	 the
masculine	principle	must	seize	the	initiative	and	place	itself	below	the	feminine	principle.

Just	as	the	first	part	of	the	book	I	begins	with	the	hexagrams	of	heaven	and	earth,	the	foundations	of	all
that	exists,	the	second	part	begins	with	the	hexagrams	of	courtship	and	marriage,	the	foundations	of	all
social	relationship

THE	JUDGMENT
Influence.	Success.
Perseverance	furthers.
To	take	a	maiden	to	wife	brings	good	fortune.

The	weak	element	is	above,	the	strong	below;	hence	their	powers	attract	each	other,	so	that	they	unite.
This	 brings	 about	 success,	 for	 all	 success	 depends	 on	 the	 effect	 of	mutual	 attraction.	 By	 keeping	 still
within	while	experiencing	 joy	without,	 one	can	prevent	 the	 joy	 from	going	 to	excess	and	hold	 it	within
proper	 bounds.	 This	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 added	 admonition,	 “Perseverance	 furthers,”	 for	 it	 is
perseverance	 that	makes	 the	difference	between	 seduction	and	 courtship;	 in	 the	 latter	 the	 strong	man
takes	a	position	inferior	to	that	of	the	weak	girl	and	shows	consideration	for	her.	This	attraction	between
affinities	is	a	general	law	of	nature.	Heaven	and	earth	attract	each	other	and	thus	all	creatures	come	into
being.	Through	such	attraction	the	sage	influences	men’s	hearts,	and	thus	the	world	attains	peace.	From
the	attractions	they	exert	we	can	learn	the	nature	of	all	beings	in	heaven	and	on	earth.

THE	IMAGE
A	lake	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	influence.
Thus	the	superior	man	encourages	people	to	approach	him
By	his	readiness	to	receive	them.

A	mountain	with	a	lake	on	its	summit	is	stimulated	by	the	moisture	from	the	lake.	It	has	this	advantage
because	its	summit	does	not	jut	out	as	a	peak	but	is	sunken.	The	image	counsels	that	the	mind	should	be
kept	humble	and	free,	so	that	it	may	remain	receptive	to	good	advice.	People	soon	give	up	counseling	a
man	who	thinks	that	he	knows	everything	better	than	anyone	else.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	big	toe.

A	movement,	before	it	is	actually	carried	out,	shows	itself	first	in	the	toes.	The	idea	of	an	influence	is
already	present,	but	it	is	not	immediately	apparent	to	others.	As	long	as	the	intention	has	no	visible	effect,
it	is	of	no	importance	to	the	outside	world	and	leads	neither	to	good	nor	to	evil.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	calves	of	the	legs.
Misfortune.
Tarrying	brings	good	fortune.

In	movement,	 the	 calf	 of	 the	 leg	 follows	 the	 foot;	 by	 itself	 it	 can	neither	 go	 forward	nor	 stand	 still.
Since	 the	movement	 is	 not	 self-governed,	 it	 bodes	 ill.	 One	 should	wait	 quietly	 until	 one	 is	 impelled	 to
action	by	a	real	influence.	Then	one	remains	uninjured.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	thighs.
Holds	to	that	which	follows	it.
To	continue	is	humiliating.

Every	 mood	 of	 the	 heart	 influences	 us	 to	 movement.	 What	 the	 heart	 desires,	 the	 thighs	 run	 after
without	 a	moment’s	 hesitation;	 they	 hold	 to	 the	 heart,	 which	 they	 follow.	 In	 the	 life	 of	man,	 however,
acting	on	the	spur	of	every	caprice	is	wrong	and	if	continued	leads	to	humiliation.	Three	considerations
suggest	themselves	here.	First,	a	man	should	not	run	precipitately	after	all	the	persons	whom	he	would
like	 to	 influence,	 but	must	 be	 able	 to	 hold	 back	 under	 certain	 circumstances.	 As	 little	 should	 he	 yield
immediately	to	every	whim	of	those	in	whose	service	he	stands.	Finally,	where	the	moods	of	his	own	heart
are	concerned,	he	should	never	ignore	the	possibility	of	inhibition,	for	this	is	the	basis	of	human	freedom.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
If	a	man	is	agitated	in	mind,
And	his	thoughts	go	hither	and	thither,
Only	those	friends
On	whom	he	fixes	his	conscious	thoughts



Will	follow.
Here	the	place	of	the	heart	is	reached.	The	impulse	that	springs	from	this	source	is	the	most	important

of	 all.	 It	 is	 of	 particular	 concern	 that	 this	 influence	be	 constant	 and	good;	 then,	 in	 spite	 of	 the	danger
arising	 from	the	great	 susceptibility	of	 the	human	heart,	 there	will	be	no	cause	 for	 remorse.	When	 the
quiet	 power	 of	 a	 man’s	 own	 character	 is	 at	 work,	 the	 effects	 produced	 are	 right.	 All	 those	 who	 are
receptive	 to	 the	 vibrations	 of	 such	 a	 spirit	 will	 then	 be	 influenced.	 Influence	 over	 others	 should	 not
express	 itself	 as	 a	 conscious	 and	willed	 effort	 to	manipulate	 them.	 Through	 practicing	 such	 conscious
incitement	 one	 becomes	 wrought	 up	 and	 is	 exhausted	 by	 the	 eternal	 stress	 and	 strain.	Moreover,	 the
effects	produced	are	then	limited	to	those	on	whom	one’s	thoughts	are	consciously	fixed.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	back	of	the	neck.
No	remorse.

The	back	of	the	neck	is	the	most	rigid	part	of	the	body.	When	the	influence	shows	itself	there,	the	will
remains	 firm	 and	 the	 influence	 does	 not	 lead	 to	 confusion.	 Hence	 remorse	 does	 not	 enter	 into
consideration	 here.	What	 takes	 place	 in	 the	 depths	 of	 one’s	 being,	 in	 the	 unconscious,	 can	 neither	 be
called	forth	nor	prevented	by	the	conscious	mind.	It	is	true	that	if	we	cannot	be	influenced	ourselves,	we
cannot	influence	the	outside	world.

Six	at	the	top	means:
The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	jaws,	cheeks,	and	tongue.

The	most	superficial	way	of	trying	to	influence	others	is	through	talk	that	has	nothing	real	behind	it.
The	 influence	produced	by	 such	mere	 tongue	wagging	must	necessarily	 remain	 insignificant.	Hence	no
indication	is	added	regarding	good	or	bad	fortune.



32.	Hêng	/	Duration

The	strong	 trigram	Chên	 is	above,	 the	weak	 trigram	Sun	below.	This	hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	of	 the
preceding	one.	 In	 the	 latter	we	have	 influence,	here	we	have	union	as	an	enduring	condition.	The	 two
images	 are	 thunder	 and	 wind,	 which	 are	 likewise	 constantly	 paired	 phenomena.	 The	 lower	 trigram
indicates	gentleness	within;	the	upper,	movement	without.

In	 the	 sphere	 of	 social	 relationships,	 the	 hexagram	 represents	 the	 institution	 of	 marriage	 as	 the
enduring	 union	 of	 the	 sexes.	 During	 courtship	 the	 young	 man	 subordinates	 himself	 to	 the	 girl,	 but	 in
marriage,	 which	 is	 represented	 by	 the	 coming	 together	 of	 the	 eldest	 son	 and	 the	 eldest	 daughter,	 the
husband	is	the	directing	and	moving	force	outside,	while	the	wife,	inside,	is	gentle	and	submissive.

THE	JUDGMENT
DURATION.	Success.	No	blame.
Perseverance	furthers.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.

Duration	is	a	state	whose	movement	is	not	worn	down	by	hindrances.	It	is	not	a	state	of	rest,	for	mere
standstill	is	regression.	Duration	is	rather	the	self-contained	and	therefore	self-renewing	movement	of	an
organized,	firmly	integrated	whole,	taking	place	in	accordance	with	immutable	laws	and	beginning	anew
at	every	ending.	The	end	is	reached	by	an	inward	movement,	by	inhalation,	systole,	contraction,	and	this
movement	turns	into	a	new	beginning,	in	which	the	movement	is	directed	outward,	in	exhalation,	diastole,
expansion.

Heavenly	bodies	exemplify	duration.	They	move	 in	 their	 fixed	orbits,	and	because	of	 this	 their	 light-
giving	power	endures.	The	seasons	of	the	year	follow	a	fixed	law	of	change	and	transformation,	hence	can
produce	effects	that	endure.

So	likewise	the	dedicated	man	embodies	an	enduring	meaning	in	his	way	of	life,	and	thereby	the	world
is	formed.	In	that	which	gives	things	their	duration,	we	can	come	to	understand	the	nature	of	all	beings	in
heaven	and	on	earth.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	and	wind:	the	image	of
DURATION.
Thus	the	superior	man	stands	firm
And	does	not	change	his	direction.

Thunder	 rolls,	and	 the	wind	blows;	both	are	examples	of	extreme	mobility	and	so	are	seemingly	 the
very	 opposite	 of	 duration,	 but	 the	 laws	 governing	 their	 appearance	 and	 subsidence,	 their	 coming	 and
going,	 endure.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 the	 independence	 of	 the	 superior	 man	 is	 not	 based	 on	 rigidity	 and
immobility	of	character.	He	always	keeps	abreast	of	 the	 time	and	changes	with	 it.	What	endures	 is	 the
unswerving	directive,	the	inner	law	of	his	being,	which	determines	all	his	actions.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Seeking	duration	too	hastily	brings	misfortune	persistently.
Nothing	that	would	further.

Whatever	endures	can	be	created	only	gradually	by	long-continued	work	and	careful	reflection.	In	the
same	sense	Lao-tse	says:	“If	we	wish	to	compress	something,	we	must	first	 let	 it	 fully	expand.”	He	who
demands	 too	 much	 at	 once	 is	 acting	 precipitately,	 and	 because	 he	 attempts	 too	 much,	 he	 ends	 by
succeeding	in	nothing.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Remorse	disappears.

The	situation	is	abnormal.	A	man’s	force	of	character	is	greater	than	the	available	material	power.	Thus
he	might	be	afraid	of	allowing	himself	to	attempt	something	beyond	his	strength.	However,	since	it	is	the
time	of	DURATION,	it	is	possible	for	him	to	control	his	inner	strength	and	so	to	avoid	excess.	Cause	for
remorse	then	disappears.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
He	who	does	not	give	duration	to	his	character
Meets	with	disgrace.
Persistent	humiliation.

If	a	man	remains	at	the	mercy	of	moods	of	hope	or	fear	aroused	by	the	outer	world,	he	loses	his	inner
consistency	 of	 character.	 Such	 inconsistency	 invariably	 leads	 to	 distressing	 experiences.	 These
humiliations	often	come	from	an	unforeseen	quarter.	Such	experiences	are	not	merely	effects	produced	by
the	external	world,	but	logical	consequences	evoked	by	his	own	nature.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
No	game	in	the	field.

If	we	are	in	pursuit	of	game	and	want	to	get	a	shot	at	a	quarry,	we	must	set	about	it	in	the	right	way.	A
man	who	persists	in	stalking	game	in	a	place	where	there	is	none	may	wait	forever	without	finding	any.
Persistence	in	search	is	not	enough.	What	is	not	sought	in	the	right	way	is	not	found.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:



Giving	duration	to	one’s	character	through	perseverance.
This	is	good	fortune	for	a	woman,	misfortune	for	a	man.

A	woman	should	follow	a	man	her	whole	life	long,	but	a	man	should	at	all	times	hold	to	what	is	his	duty
at	the	given	moment.	Should	he	persistently	seek	to	conform	to	the	woman,	it	would	be	a	mistake	for	him.
Accordingly	it	is	altogether	right	for	a	woman	to	hold	conservatively	to	tradition,	but	a	man	must	always
be	flexible	and	adaptable	and	allow	himself	 to	be	guided	solely	by	what	his	duty	requires	of	him	at	 the
moment.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Restlessness	as	an	enduring	condition	brings	misfortune.

There	 are	 people	 who	 live	 in	 a	 state	 of	 perpetual	 hurry	 without	 ever	 attaining	 inner	 composure.
Restlessness	not	only	prevents	all	thoroughness	but	actually	becomes	a	danger	if	it	is	dominant	in	places
of	authority.



33.	Tun	/	Retreat

The	power	of	 the	dark	 is	ascending.	The	 light	 retreats	 to	security,	 so	 that	 the	dark	cannot	encroach
upon	it.	This	retreat	is	a	matter	not	of	man’s	will	but	of	natural	law.	Therefore	in	this	case	withdrawal	is
proper;	it	is	the	correct	way	to	behave	in	order	not	to	exhaust	one’s	forces.1

In	 the	 calendar	 this	 hexagram	 is	 linked	 with	 the	 sixth	 month	 (July–August),	 in	 which	 the	 forces	 of
winter	are	already	showing	their	influence.

THE	JUDGMENT
RETREAT.	Success.
In	what	is	small,	perseverance	furthers.

Conditions	are	such	that	the	hostile	forces	favored	by	the	time	are	advancing.	In	this	case	retreat	is	the
right	course,	and	it	is	through	retreat	that	success	is	achieved.	But	success	consists	in	being	able	to	carry
out	the	retreat	correctly.	Retreat	is	not	to	be	confused	with	flight.	Flight	means	saving	oneself	under	any
circumstances,	whereas	retreat	 is	a	sign	of	strength.	We	must	be	careful	not	 to	miss	 the	right	moment
while	we	are	in	full	possession	of	power	and	position.	Then	we	shall	be	able	to	interpret	the	signs	of	the
time	before	 it	 is	 too	 late	and	to	prepare	for	provisional	retreat	 instead	of	being	drawn	into	a	desperate
life-and-death	struggle.	Thus	we	do	not	simply	abandon	the	field	to	the	opponent;	we	make	it	difficult	for
him	 to	 advance	 by	 showing	 perseverance	 in	 single	 acts	 of	 resistance.	 In	 this	 way	 we	 prepare,	 while
retreating,	for	the	counter-movement.	Understanding	the	laws	of	a	constructive	retreat	of	this	sort	is	not
easy.	The	meaning	that	lies	hidden	in	such	a	time	is	important.

THE	IMAGE
Mountain	under	heaven:	the	image	of
RETREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man	keeps	the	inferior	man	at	a	distance,
Not	angrily	but	with	reserve.

The	mountain	rises	up	under	heaven,	but	owing	to	its	nature	it	finally	comes	to	a	stop.	Heaven	on	the
other	 hand	 retreats	 upward	 before	 it	 into	 the	 distance	 and	 remains	 out	 of	 reach.	 This	 symbolizes	 the
behavior	of	the	superior	man	toward	a	climbing	inferior;	he	retreats	into	his	own	thoughts	as	the	inferior
man	comes	forward.	He	does	not	hate	him,	for	hatred	is	a	form	of	subjective	involvement	by	which	we	are
bound	to	the	hated	object.	The	superior	man	shows	strength	(heaven)	in	that	he	brings	the	inferior	man	to
a	standstill	(mountain)	by	his	dignified	reserve.

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning	means:
At	the	tail	in	retreat.	This	is	dangerous.
One	must	not	wish	to	undertake	anything.

Since	the	hexagram	is	 the	picture	of	something	that	 is	retreating,	 the	 lowest	 line	represents	 the	tail
and	the	top	line	the	head.	In	a	retreat	 it	 is	advantageous	to	be	at	the	front.	Here	one	is	at	the	back,	 in
immediate	contact	with	 the	pursuing	enemy.	This	 is	dangerous,	and	under	such	circumstances	 it	 is	not
advisable	to	undertake	anything.	Keeping	still	is	the	easiest	way	of	escaping	from	the	threatening	danger.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
He	holds	him	fast	with	yellow	oxhide.
No	one	can	tear	him	loose.

Yellow	 is	 the	 color	 of	 the	middle.	 It	 indicates	 that	which	 is	 correct	 and	 in	 line	with	 duty.	 Oxhide	 is
strong	and	not	to	be	torn.

While	 the	superior	men	retreat	and	 the	 inferior	press	after	 them,	 the	 inferior	man	represented	here
holds	on	so	firmly	and	tightly	to	the	superior	men	that	the	latter	cannot	shake	him	off.	And	because	he	is
in	quest	of	what	is	right	and	so	strong	in	purpose,	he	reaches	his	goal.2	Thus	the	line	confirms	what	is	said
in	the	Judgment:	“In	what	is	small”—here	equivalent	to	“in	the	inferior	man”—“perseverance	furthers.”

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
A	halted	retreat
Is	nerve-wracking	and	dangerous.
To	retain	people	as	men-	and	maidservants
Brings	good	fortune.

When	it	 is	time	to	retreat	 it	 is	both	unpleasant	and	dangerous	to	be	held	back,	because	then	one	no
longer	has	freedom	of	action.	In	such	a	case	the	only	expedient	is	to	take	into	one’s	service,	so	to	speak,
those	who	refuse	to	let	one	go,	so	that	one	may	at	least	keep	one’s	initiative	and	not	fall	helplessly	under
their	 domination.	 But	 even	with	 this	 expedient	 the	 situation	 is	 far	 from	 satisfactory—for	what	 can	 one
hope	to	accomplish	with	such	servants?

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Voluntary	retreat	brings	good	fortune	to	the	superior	man
And	downfall	to	the	inferior	man.

In	 retreating	 the	 superior	man	 is	 intent	 on	 taking	his	 departure	willingly	 and	 in	 all	 friendliness.	He
easily	adjusts	his	mind	to	retreat,	because	in	retreating	he	does	not	have	to	do	violence	to	his	convictions.
The	only	one	who	suffers	is	the	inferior	man	from	whom	he	retreats,	who	will	degenerate	when	deprived



of	the	guidance	of	the	superior	man.
Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:

Friendly	retreat.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
It	is	the	business	of	the	superior	man	to	recognize	in	time	that	the	moment	for	retreat	has	come.	If	the

right	moment	 is	chosen,	 the	retreat	can	be	carried	out	within	the	forms	of	perfect	 friendliness,	without
the	necessity	of	disagreeable	discussions.	Yet,	 for	all	 the	observance	of	 amenities,	 absolute	 firmness	of
decision	is	necessary	if	one	is	not	to	be	led	astray	by	irrelevant	considerations.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Cheerful	retreat.	Everything	serves	to	further.

The	situation	is	unequivocal.	Inner	detachment	has	become	an	established	fact,	and	we	are	at	liberty	to
depart.	When	one	 sees	 the	way	 ahead	 thus	 clearly,	 free	 of	 all	 doubt,	 a	 cheerful	mood	 sets	 in,	 and	one
chooses	what	is	right	without	further	thought.	Such	a	clear	path	ahead	always	leads	to	the	good.



34.	Ta	Chuang	/	The	Power	of	the	Great

The	great	lines,	that	is,	the	light,	strong	lines,	are	powerful.	Four	light	lines	have	entered	the	hexagram
from	below	and	are	about	to	ascend	higher.	The	upper	trigram	is	Chên,	the	Arousing;	the	lower	is	Ch’ien,
the	Creative.	Ch’ien	is	strong,	Chên	produces	movement.	The	union	of	movement	and	strength	gives	the
meaning	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.	The	hexagram	is	linked	with	the	second	month	(March–April).

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.	Perseverance	furthers.

The	hexagram	points	to	a	time	when	inner	worth	mounts	with	great	force	and	comes	to	power.	But	its
strength	has	already	passed	beyond	the	median	line,	hence	there	is	danger	that	one	may	rely	entirely	on
one’s	own	power	and	forget	to	ask	what	is	right.	There	is	danger	too	that,	being	intent	on	movement,	we
may	not	wait	 for	 the	 right	 time.	Therefore	 the	added	 statement	 that	perseverance	 furthers.	For	 that	 is
truly	 great	 power	 which	 does	 not	 degenerate	 into	 mere	 force	 but	 remains	 inwardly	 united	 with	 the
fundamental	principles	of	right	and	of	justice.	When	we	understand	this	point—namely,	that	greatness	and
justice	must	be	indissolubly	united—we	understand	the	true	meaning	of	all	that	happens	in	heaven	and	on
earth.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	in	heaven	above:
The	image	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE
GREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man	does	not	tread	upon	paths
That	do	not	accord	with	established	order.

Thunder—electrical	 energy—mounts	 upward	 in	 the	 spring.	 The	 direction	 of	 this	 movement	 is	 in
harmony	 with	 that	 of	 the	 movement	 of	 heaven.	 It	 is	 therefore	 a	 movement	 in	 accord	 with	 heaven,
producing	 great	 power.	 However,	 true	 greatness	 depends	 on	 being	 in	 harmony	 with	 what	 is	 right.
Therefore	in	times	of	great	power	the	superior	man	avoids	doing	anything	that	is	not	in	harmony	with	the
established	order.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Power	in	the	toes.
Continuing	brings	misfortune.
This	is	certainly	true.

The	toes	are	in	the	lowest	place	and	are	ready	to	advance.	So	likewise	great	power	in	lowly	station	is
inclined	 to	 effect	 advance	 by	 force.	 This,	 if	 carried	 further,	 would	 certainly	 lead	 to	 misfortune,	 and
therefore	by	way	of	advice	a	warning	is	added.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

The	 premise	 here	 is	 that	 the	 gates	 to	 success	 are	 beginning	 to	 open.	 Resistance	 gives	way	 and	we
forge	ahead.	This	is	the	point	at	which,	only	too	easily,	we	become	the	prey	of	exuberant	self-confidence.
This	is	why	the	oracle	says	that	perseverance	(i.e.,	perseverance	in	inner	equilibrium,	without	excessive
use	of	power)	brings	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	inferior	man	works	through	power.
The	superior	man	does	not	act	thus.
To	continue	is	dangerous.
A	goat	butts	against	a	hedge
And	gets	its	horns	entangled.

Making	 a	 boast	 of	 power	 leads	 to	 entanglements,	 just	 as	 a	 goat	 entangles	 its	 horns	 when	 it	 butts
against	 a	 hedge.	 Whereas	 an	 inferior	 man	 revels	 in	 power	 when	 he	 comes	 into	 possession	 of	 it,	 the
superior	 man	 never	 makes	 this	 mistake.	 He	 is	 conscious	 at	 all	 times	 of	 the	 danger	 of	 pushing	 ahead
regardless	of	circumstances,	and	therefore	renounces	in	good	time	the	empty	display	of	force.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
The	hedge	opens;	there	is	no	entanglement.
Power	depends	upon	the	axle	of	a	big	cart.

If	a	man	goes	on	quietly	and	perseveringly	working	at	the	removal	of	resistances,	success	comes	in	the
end.	 The	 obstructions	 give	 way	 and	 all	 occasion	 for	 remorse	 arising	 from	 excessive	 use	 of	 power
disappears.
Such	a	man’s	power	does	not	show	externally,	yet	it	can	move	heavy	loads,	like	a	big	cart	whose	real

strength	lies	in	its	axle.	The	less	that	power	is	applied	outwardly,	the	greater	its	effect.
Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:



Loses	the	goat	with	ease.
No	remorse.

The	 goat	 is	 noted	 for	 hardness	 outwardly	 and	 weakness	 within.	 Now	 the	 situation	 is	 such	 that
everything	is	easy;	there	is	no	more	resistance.	One	can	give	up	a	belligerent,	stubborn	way	of	acting	and
will	not	have	to	regret	it.

Six	at	the	top	means:
A	goat	butts	against	a	hedge.
It	cannot	go	backward,	it	cannot	go	forward.
Nothing	serves	to	further.
If	one	notes	the	difficulty,	this	brings	good	fortune.

If	we	venture	too	far	we	come	to	a	deadlock,	unable	either	to	advance	or	to	retreat,	and	whatever	we
do	merely	 serves	 to	 complicate	 things	 further.	 Such	 obstinacy	 leads	 to	 insuperable	 difficulties.	 But	 if,
realizing	 the	 situation,	we	compose	ourselves	and	decide	not	 to	continue,	everything	will	 right	 itself	 in
time.



35.	Chin	/	Progress

The	 hexagram	 represents	 the	 sun	 rising	 over	 the	 earth.	 It	 is	 therefore	 the	 symbol	 of	 rapid,	 easy
progress,	which	at	the	same	time	means	ever	widening	expansion	and	clarity.

THE	JUDGMENT
PROGRESS.	The	powerful	prince
Is	honored	with	horses	in	large	numbers.
In	a	single	day	he	is	granted	audience	three	times.

As	 an	 example	 of	 progress,	 this	 pictures	 a	 time	when	 a	 powerful	 feudal	 lord	 rallies	 the	 other	 lords
around	the	sovereign	and	pledges	fealty	and	peace.	The	sovereign	rewards	him	richly	and	invites	him	to	a
closer	intimacy.
A	 twofold	 idea	 is	 set	 forth	here.	The	actual	effect	of	 the	progress	emanates	 from	a	man	who	 is	 in	a

dependent	position	and	whom	the	others	regard	as	 their	equal	and	are	 therefore	willing	 to	 follow.	This
leader	has	enough	clarity	of	vision	not	to	abuse	his	great	influence	but	to	use	it	rather	for	the	benefit	of
his	 ruler.	His	 ruler	 in	 turn	 is	 free	 of	 all	 jealousy,	 showers	 presents	 on	 the	 great	man,	 and	 invites	 him
continually	 to	 his	 court.	 An	 enlightened	 ruler	 and	 an	 obedient	 servant—this	 is	 the	 condition	 on	which
great	progress	depends.

THE	IMAGE
The	sun	rises	over	the	earth:
The	image	of	PROGRESS.
Thus	the	superior	man	himself
Brightens	his	bright	virtue.

The	light	of	the	sun	as	it	rises	over	the	earth	is	by	nature	clear.	The	higher	the	sun	rises,	the	more	it
emerges	from	the	dark	mists,	spreading	the	pristine	purity	of	its	rays	over	an	ever	widening	area.	The	real
nature	 of	 man	 is	 likewise	 originally	 good,	 but	 it	 becomes	 clouded	 by	 contact	 with	 earthly	 things	 and
therefore	needs	purification	before	it	can	shine	forth	in	its	native	clarity.1

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Progressing,	but	turned	back.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
If	one	meets	with	no	confidence,	one	should	remain	calm.
No	mistake.

At	a	time	when	all	elements	are	pressing	for	progress,	we	are	still	uncertain	whether	in	the	course	of
advance	we	may	not	meet	with	a	rebuff.	Then	the	thing	to	do	is	simply	to	continue	in	what	is	right;	in	the
end	this	will	bring	good	fortune.	It	may	be	that	we	meet	with	no	confidence.	In	this	case	we	ought	not	to
try	to	win	confidence	regardless	of	the	situation,	but	should	remain	calm	and	cheerful	and	refuse	to	be
roused	to	anger.	Thus	we	remain	free	of	mistakes.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Progressing,	but	in	sorrow.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Then	one	obtains	great	happiness	from	one’s	ancestress.

Progress	is	halted;	an	individual	is	kept	from	getting	in	touch	with	the	man	in	authority	with	whom	he
has	a	connection.	When	 this	happens,	he	must	remain	persevering,	although	he	 is	grieved;	 then	with	a
maternal	gentleness	the	man	in	question	will	bestow	great	happiness	upon	him.	This	happiness	comes	to
him—and	 is	well	 deserved—because	 in	 this	 case	mutual	 attraction	 does	 not	 rest	 on	 selfish	 or	 partisan
motives	but	on	firm	and	correct	principles.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
All	are	in	accord.	Remorse	disappears.

A	 man	 strives	 onward,	 in	 association	 with	 others	 whose	 backing	 encourages	 him.	 This	 dispels	 any
cause	for	regret	over	the	fact	that	he	does	not	have	enough	independence	to	triumph	unaided	over	every
hostile	turn	of	fate.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Progress	like	a	hamster.
Perseverance	brings	danger.

In	times	of	progress	it	is	easy	for	strong	men	in	the	wrong	places	to	amass	great	possessions.	But	such
conduct	shuns	the	light.	And	since	times	of	progress	are	also	always	times	in	which	dubious	procedures
are	inevitably	brought	to	light,	perseverance	in	such	action	always	leads	to	danger.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Remorse	disappears.
Take	not	gain	and	loss	to	heart.
Undertakings	bring	good	fortune.
Everything	serves	to	further.

The	situation	described	here	is	that	of	one	who,	finding	himself	 in	an	influential	position	in	a	time	of
progress,	remains	gentle	and	reserved.	He	might	reproach	himself	for	lack	of	energy	in	making	the	most



of	the	propitiousness	of	the	time	and	obtaining	all	possible	advantage.	However,	this	regret	passes	away.
He	must	not	take	either	loss	or	gain	to	heart;	they	are	minor	considerations.	What	matters	much	more	is
the	fact	that	in	this	way	he	has	assured	himself	of	opportunities	for	successful	and	beneficent	influence.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Making	progress	with	the	horns	is	permissible
Only	for	the	purpose	of	punishing	one’s	own	city.
To	be	conscious	of	danger	brings	good	fortune.
No	blame.
Perseverance	brings	humiliation.

Making	progress	with	lowered	horns—i.e.,	acting	on	the	offensive—is	permissible,	 in	times	like	those
referred	to	here,	only	in	dealing	with	the	mistakes	of	one’s	own	people.	Even	then	we	must	bear	in	mind
that	 proceeding	 on	 the	 offensive	 may	 always	 be	 dangerous.	 In	 this	 way	 we	 avoid	 the	 mistakes	 that
otherwise	 threaten,	 and	 succeed	 in	 what	 we	 set	 out	 to	 do.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 perseverance	 in	 such
overenergetic	behavior,	 especially	 toward	persons	with	whom	 there	 is	no	 close	 connection,	will	 lead	 to
humiliation.



36.	Ming	I	/	Darkening	of	the	Light

Here	the	sun	has	sunk	under	the	earth	and	is	therefore	darkened.	The	name	of	the	hexagram	means
literally	“wounding	of	the	bright”;	hence	the	individual	lines	contain	frequent	references	to	wounding.	The
situation	is	the	exact	opposite	of	that	in	the	foregoing	hexagram.	In	the	latter	a	wise	man	at	the	head	of
affairs	has	able	helpers,	and	 in	company	with	 them	makes	progress;	here	a	man	of	dark	nature	 is	 in	a
position	of	authority	and	brings	harm	to	the	wise	and	able	man.

THE	JUDGMENT
DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT.	In	adversity
It	furthers	one	to	be	persevering.

One	must	not	unresistingly	 let	himself	be	 swept	along	by	unfavorable	circumstances,	nor	permit	his
steadfastness	to	be	shaken.	He	can	avoid	this	by	maintaining	his	inner	light,	while	remaining	outwardly
yielding	and	tractable.	With	this	attitude	he	can	overcome	even	the	greatest	adversities.

In	 some	 situations	 indeed	 a	 man	 must	 hide	 his	 light,	 in	 order	 to	 make	 his	 will	 prevail	 in	 spite	 of
difficulties	 in	his	 immediate	environment.	Perseverance	must	dwell	 in	 inmost	consciousness	and	should
not	be	discernible	from	without.	Only	thus	is	a	man	able	to	maintain	his	will	in	the	face	of	difficulties.

THE	IMAGE
The	light	has	sunk	into	the	earth:
The	image	of	DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT.
Thus	does	the	superior	man	live	with	the	great	mass:
He	veils	his	light,	yet	still	shines.

In	a	 time	of	darkness	 it	 is	 essential	 to	be	cautious	and	 reserved.	One	 should	not	needlessly	awaken
overwhelming	enmity	by	inconsiderate	behavior.	In	such	times	one	ought	not	to	fall	in	with	the	practices
of	others;	neither	should	one	drag	them	censoriously	into	the	light.	In	social	 intercourse	one	should	not
try	to	be	all-knowing.	One	should	let	many	things	pass,	without	being	duped.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Darkening	of	the	light	during	flight.
He	lowers	his	wings.
The	superior	man	does	not	eat	for	three	days
On	his	wanderings.
But	he	has	somewhere	to	go.
The	host	has	occasion	to	gossip	about	him.

With	grandiose	resolve	a	man	endeavors	to	soar	above	all	obstacles,	but	thus	encounters	a	hostile	fate.
He	 retreats	 and	 evades	 the	 issue.	 The	 time	 is	 difficult.	 Without	 rest,	 he	 must	 hurry	 along,	 with	 no
permanent	 abiding	 place.	 If	 he	 does	 not	 want	 to	 make	 compromises	 within	 himself,	 but	 insists	 on
remaining	true	to	his	principles,	he	suffers	deprivation.	Nevertheless	he	has	a	fixed	goal	to	strive	for,	even
though	the	people	with	whom	he	lives	do	not	understand	him	and	speak	ill	of	him.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Darkening	of	the	light	injures	him	in	the	left	thigh.
He	gives	aid	with	the	strength	of	a	horse.
Good	fortune.

Here	the	Lord	of	Light	is	in	a	subordinate	place	and	is	wounded	by	the	Lord	of	Darkness.	But	the	injury
is	not	fatal;	it	is	only	a	hindrance.	Rescue	is	still	possible.	The	wounded	man	gives	no	thought	to	himself;
he	thinks	only	of	saving	the	others	who	are	also	in	danger.	Therefore	he	tries	with	all	his	strength	to	save
all	that	can	be	saved.	There	is	good	fortune	in	thus	acting	according	to	duty.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Darkening	of	the	light	during	the	hunt	in	the	south.
Their	great	leader	is	captured.
One	must	not	expect	perseverance	too	soon.

It	seems	as	if	chance	were	at	work.	While	the	strong,	loyal	man	is	striving	eagerly	and	in	good	faith	to
create	order,	he	meets	 the	 ringleader	of	 the	disorder,	as	 if	by	accident,	and	seizes	him.	Thus	victory	 is
achieved.	 But	 in	 abolishing	 abuses	 one	must	 not	 be	 too	 hasty.	 This	 would	 turn	 out	 badly	 because	 the
abuses	have	been	in	existence	so	long.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	penetrates	the	left	side	of	the	belly.
One	gets	at	the	very	heart	of	the	darkening	of	the	light,
And	leaves	gate	and	courtyard.

We	find	ourselves	close	to	the	commander	of	darkness	and	so	discover	his	most	secret	thoughts.	In	this
way	we	realize	 that	 there	 is	no	 longer	any	hope	of	 improvement,	and	thus	we	are	enabled	 to	 leave	 the
scene	of	disaster	before	the	storm	breaks.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Darkening	of	the	light	as	with	Prince	Chi.



Perseverance	furthers.
Prince	 Chi	 lived	 at	 the	 court	 of	 the	 evil	 tyrant	 Chou	 Hsin,	 who,	 although	 not	 mentioned	 by	 name,

furnishes	the	historical	example	on	which	this	whole	situation	is	based.	Prince	Chi	was	a	relative	of	the
tyrant	 and	 could	 not	 withdraw	 from	 court;	 therefore	 he	 concealed	 his	 true	 sentiments	 and	 feigned
insanity.	 Although	 he	 was	 held	 a	 slave,	 he	 did	 not	 allow	 external	 misery	 to	 deflect	 him	 from	 his
convictions.

This	provides	a	teaching	for	those	who	cannot	leave	their	posts	in	times	of	darkness.	In	order	to	escape
danger,	they	need	invincible	perseverance	of	spirit	and	redoubled	caution	in	their	dealings	with	the	world.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Not	light	but	darkness.
First	he	climbed	up	to	heaven,
Then	he	plunged	into	the	depths	of	the	earth.

Here	the	climax	of	the	darkening	is	reached.	The	dark	power	at	first	held	so	high	a	place	that	it	could
wound	all	who	were	on	the	side	of	good	and	of	the	light.	But	in	the	end	it	perishes	of	its	own	darkness,	for
evil	must	 itself	 fall	at	 the	very	moment	when	 it	has	wholly	overcome	 the	good,	and	 thus	consumed	 the
energy	to	which	it	owed	its	duration.



37.	Chia	Jên	/	The	Family	[The	Clan]

This	hexagram	represents	the	 laws	obtaining	within	the	family.	The	strong	line	at	the	top	represents
the	 father,	 the	 lowest	 the	 son.	 The	 strong	 line	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 represents	 the	 husband,	 the	 yielding
second	line	the	wife.	On	the	other	hand,	the	two	strong	lines	in	the	fifth	and	the	third	place	represent	two
brothers,	and	the	two	weak	lines	correlated	with	them	in	the	fourth	and	the	second	place	stand	for	their
respective	 wives.	 Thus	 all	 the	 connections	 and	 relationships	 within	 the	 family	 find	 their	 appropriate
expression.	Each	 individual	 line	 has	 the	 character	 according	with	 its	 place.	 The	 fact	 that	 a	 strong	 line
occupies	 the	 sixth	 place—where	 a	 weak	 line	 might	 be	 expected—indicates	 very	 clearly	 the	 strong
leadership	that	must	come	from	the	head	of	the	family.	The	line	is	to	be	considered	here	not	in	its	quality
as	the	sixth	but	in	its	quality	as	the	top	line.	THE	FAMILY	shows	the	laws	operative	within	the	household
that,	transferred	to	outside	life,	keep	the	state	and	the	world	in	order.	The	influence	that	goes	out	from
within	the	family	is	represented	by	the	symbol	of	the	wind	created	by	fire.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	FAMILY.	The	perseverance	of	the	woman	furthers.

The	foundation	of	the	family	is	the	relationship	between	husband	and	wife.	The	tie	that	holds	the	family
together	lies	in	the	loyalty	and	perseverance	of	the	wife.	Her	place	is	within	(second	line),	while	that	of
the	husband	is	without	(fifth	line).	It	is	in	accord	with	the	great	laws	of	nature	that	husband	and	wife	take
their	proper	places.	Within	the	family	a	strong	authority	is	needed;	this	is	represented	by	the	parents.	If
the	 father	 is	really	a	 father	and	the	son	a	son,	 if	 the	elder	brother	 fulfills	his	position,	and	the	younger
fulfills	his,	 if	 the	husband	is	really	a	husband	and	the	wife	a	wife,	then	the	family	 is	 in	order.	When	the
family	is	in	order,	all	the	social	relationships	of	mankind	will	be	in	order.
Three	of	the	five	social	relationships	are	to	be	found	within	the	family—that	between	father	and	son,

which	is	the	relation	of	love,	that	between	husband	and	wife,	which	is	the	relation	of	chaste	conduct,	and
that	between	elder	and	younger	brother,	which	is	the	relation	of	correctness.	The	loving	reverence	of	the
son	is	then	carried	over	to	the	prince	in	the	form	of	faithfulness	to	duty;	the	affection	and	correctness	of
behavior	existing	between	the	two	brothers	are	extended	to	a	friend	in	the	form	of	loyalty,	and	to	a	person
of	superior	rank	in	the	form	of	deference.	The	family	 is	society	in	embryo;	 it	 is	the	native	soil	on	which
performance	of	moral	duty	is	made	easy	through	natural	affection,	so	that	within	a	small	circle	a	basis	of
moral	practice	is	created,	and	this	is	later	widened	to	include	human	relationships	in	general.

THE	IMAGE
The	image	of	THE	FAMILY.
Thus	the	superior	man	has	substance	in	his	words
And	duration	in	his	way	of	life.

Heat	creates	energy:	this	is	signified	by	the	wind	stirred	up	by	the	fire	and	issuing	forth	from	it.	This
represents	 influence	 working	 from	within	 outward.	 The	 same	 thing	 is	 needed	 in	 the	 regulation	 of	 the
family.	Here	too	the	influence	on	others	must	proceed	from	one’s	own	person.	In	order	to	be	capable	of
producing	such	an	influence,	one’s	words	must	have	power,	and	this	they	can	have	only	if	they	are	based
on	something	real,	just	as	flame	depends	on	its	fuel.	Words	have	influence	only	when	they	are	pertinent
and	 clearly	 related	 to	 definite	 circumstances.	 General	 discourses	 and	 admonitions	 have	 no	 effect
whatsoever.	Furthermore,	the	words	must	be	supported	by	one’s	entire	conduct,	just	as	the	wind	is	made
effective	by	 its	duration.	Only	 firm	and	consistent	conduct	will	make	such	an	 impression	on	others	that
they	can	adapt	and	conform	to	it.	If	words	and	conduct	are	not	in	accord	and	not	consistent,	they	will	have
no	effect.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Firm	seclusion	within	the	family.
Remorse	disappears.

The	 family	 must	 form	 a	 well-defined	 unit	 within	 which	 each	 member	 knows	 his	 place.	 From	 the
beginning	 each	 child	 must	 be	 accustomed	 to	 firmly	 established	 rules	 of	 order,	 before	 ever	 its	 will	 is
directed	to	other	things.	If	we	begin	too	late	to	enforce	order,	when	the	will	of	the	child	has	already	been
overindulged,	the	whims	and	passions,	grown	stronger	with	the	years,	offer	resistance	and	give	cause	for
remorse.	 If	we	 insist	 on	 order	 from	 the	 outset,	 occasions	 for	 remorse	may	 arise—in	 general	 social	 life
these	are	unavoidable—but	the	remorse	always	disappears	again,	and	everything	rights	itself.	For	there	is
nothing	more	easily	avoided	and	more	difficult	to	carry	through	than	“breaking	a	child’s	will.”

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
She	should	not	follow	her	whims.
She	must	attend	within	to	the	food.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

The	wife	must	always	be	guided	by	the	will	of	the	master	of	the	house,	be	he	father,	husband,	or	grown
son.	Her	place	is	within	the	house.	There,	without	having	to	look	for	them,	she	has	great	and	important
duties.	She	must	attend	to	the	nourishment	of	her	family	and	to	the	food	for	the	sacrifice.	In	this	way	she
becomes	 the	 center	 of	 the	 social	 and	 religious	 life	 of	 the	 family,	 and	 her	 perseverance	 in	 this	 position



brings	good	fortune	to	the	whole	house.
In	 relation	 to	 general	 conditions,	 the	 counsel	 given	 here	 is	 to	 seek	 nothing	 by	means	 of	 force,	 but

quietly	to	confine	oneself	to	the	duties	at	hand.
Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
When	tempers	flare	up	in	the	family,
Too	great	severity	brings	remorse.
Good	fortune	nonetheless.
When	woman	and	child	dally	and	laugh,
It	leads	in	the	end	to	humiliation.

In	 the	 family	 the	proper	mean	between	 severity	 and	 indulgence	ought	 to	prevail.	 Too	great	 severity
toward	one’s	own	flesh	and	blood	leads	to	remorse.	The	wise	thing	is	to	build	strong	dikes	within	which
complete	 freedom	of	movement	 is	allowed	each	 individual.	But	 in	doubtful	 instances	 too	great	 severity,
despite	occasional	mistakes,	is	preferable,	because	it	preserves	discipline	in	the	family,	whereas	too	great
weakness	leads	to	disgrace.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
She	is	the	treasure	of	the	house.
Great	good	fortune.

It	is	upon	the	woman	of	the	house	that	the	well-being	of	the	family	depends.	Well-being	prevails	when
expenditures	and	income	are	soundly	balanced.	This	leads	to	great	good	fortune.	In	the	sphere	of	public
life,	this	line	refers	to	the	faithful	steward	whose	measures	further	the	general	welfare.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
As	a	king	he	approaches	his	family.
Fear	not.
Good	fortune.

A	king	is	the	symbol	of	a	fatherly	man	who	is	richly	endowed	in	mind.	He	does	nothing	to	make	himself
feared;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 the	 whole	 family	 can	 trust	 him,	 because	 love	 governs	 their	 intercourse.	 His
character	of	itself	exercises	the	right	influence.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
His	work	commands	respect.
In	the	end	good	fortune	comes.

In	the	last	analysis,	order	within	the	family	depends	on	the	character	of	the	master	of	the	house.	If	he
cultivates	his	personality	so	that	it	works	impressively	through	the	force	of	inner	truth,	all	goes	well	with
the	family.	In	a	ruling	position	one	must	of	his	own	accord	assume	responsibility.



38.	K’uei	/	Opposition

This	hexagram	is	composed	of	 the	trigram	Li	above,	 i.e.,	 flame,	which	burns	upward,	and	Tui	below,
i.e.,	the	lake,	which	seeps	downward.	These	two	movements	are	in	direct	contrast.	Furthermore,	Li	is	the
second	daughter	and	Tui	the	youngest	daughter,	and	although	they	live	in	the	same	house	they	belong	to
different	men;	hence	their	wills	are	not	the	same	but	are	divergently	directed.

THE	JUDGMENT
OPPOSITION.	In	small	matters,	good	fortune.

When	 people	 live	 in	 opposition	 and	 estrangement	 they	 cannot	 carry	 out	 a	 great	 undertaking	 in
common;	their	points	of	view	diverge	too	widely.	In	such	circumstances	one	should	above	all	not	proceed
brusquely,	 for	 that	 would	 only	 increase	 the	 existing	 opposition;	 instead,	 one	 should	 limit	 oneself	 to
producing	gradual	effects	 in	small	matters.	Here	success	can	still	be	expected,	because	 the	situation	 is
such	that	the	opposition	does	not	preclude	all	agreement.

In	 general,	 opposition	 appears	 as	 an	 obstruction,	 but	 when	 it	 represents	 polarity	 within	 a
comprehensive	whole,	it	has	also	its	useful	and	important	functions.	The	oppositions	of	heaven	and	earth,
spirit	and	nature,	man	and	woman,	when	reconciled,	bring	about	the	creation	and	reproduction	of	life.	In
the	 world	 of	 visible	 things,	 the	 principle	 of	 opposites	 makes	 possible	 the	 differentiation	 by	 categories
through	which	order	is	brought	into	the	world.

THE	IMAGE
Above,	fire;	below,	the	lake:
The	image	of	OPPOSITION.
Thus	amid	all	fellowship
The	superior	man	retains	his	individuality.

The	two	elements,	fire	and	water,	never	mingle	but	even	when	in	contact	retain	their	own	natures.	So
the	cultured	man	 is	never	 led	 into	baseness	or	vulgarity	 through	 intercourse	or	community	of	 interests
with	persons	of	another	sort;	regardless	of	all	commingling,	he	will	always	preserve	his	individuality.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Remorse	disappears.
If	you	lose	your	horse,	do	not	run	after	it;
It	will	come	back	of	its	own	accord.
When	you	see	evil	people,
Guard	yourself	against	mistakes.

Even	 in	 times	when	oppositions	prevail,	mistakes	can	be	avoided,	so	 that	remorse	disappears.	When
opposition	begins	to	manifest	itself,	a	man	must	not	try	to	bring	about	unity	by	force,	for	by	so	doing	he
would	only	achieve	the	contrary,	just	as	a	horse	goes	farther	and	farther	away	if	one	runs	after	it.	If	it	is
one’s	own	horse,	one	can	safely	let	it	go;	it	will	come	back	of	its	own	accord.	So	too	when	someone	who
belongs	with	us	is	momentarily	estranged	because	of	a	misunderstanding,	he	will	return	of	his	own	accord
if	we	leave	matters	to	him.	On	the	other	hand,	it	is	well	to	be	cautious	when	evil	men	who	do	not	belong
with	us	force	themselves	upon	us,	again	as	the	result	of	a	misunderstanding.	Here	the	important	thing	is
to	 avoid	 mistakes.	We	must	 not	 try	 to	 shake	 off	 these	 evil	 men	 by	 force;	 this	 would	 give	 rise	 to	 real
hostility.	We	must	simply	endure	them.	They	will	eventually	withdraw	of	their	own	accord.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
One	meets	his	lord	in	a	narrow	street.
No	blame.

As	a	result	of	misunderstandings,	it	has	become	impossible	for	people	who	by	nature	belong	together
to	meet	in	the	correct	way.	This	being	so,	an	accidental	meeting	under	informal	circumstances	may	serve
the	purpose,	provided	there	is	an	inner	affinity	between	them.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
One	sees	the	wagon	dragged	back,
The	oxen	halted,
A	man’s	hair	and	nose	cut	off.
Not	a	good	beginning,	but	a	good	end.

Often	it	seems	to	a	man	as	though	everything	were	conspiring	against	him.	He	sees	himself	checked
and	 hindered	 in	 his	 progress,	 insulted	 and	 dishonored.1	 However,	 he	 must	 not	 let	 himself	 be	 misled;
despite	 this	 opposition,	 he	 must	 cleave	 to	 the	 man	 with	 whom	 he	 knows	 he	 belongs.	 Thus,
notwithstanding	the	bad	beginning,	the	matter	will	end	well.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Isolated	through	opposition,
One	meets	a	like-minded	man
With	whom	one	can	associate	in	good	faith.
Despite	the	danger,	no	blame.

If	a	man	finds	himself	 in	a	company	of	people	from	whom	he	is	separated	by	an	inner	opposition,	he
becomes	isolated.	But	if	in	such	a	situation	a	man	meets	someone	who	fundamentally,	by	the	very	law	of



his	being,	is	kin	to	him,	and	whom	he	can	trust	completely,	he	overcomes	all	the	dangers	of	isolation.	His
will	achieves	its	aim,	and	he	becomes	free	of	faults.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Remorse	disappears.
The	companion	bites	his	way	through	the	wrappings.
If	one	goes	to	him,
How	could	it	be	a	mistake?

Coming	upon	a	sincere	man,	one	fails	to	recognize	him	at	first	because	of	the	general	estrangement.
However,	 he	 bites	 his	 way	 through	 the	 wrappings	 that	 are	 causing	 the	 separation.	 When	 such	 a
companion	thus	reveals	himself	in	his	true	character,	it	is	one’s	duty	to	go	to	meet	him	and	to	work	with
him.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Isolated	through	opposition,
One	sees	one’s	companion	as	a	pig	covered	with	dirt,
As	a	wagon	full	of	devils.
First	one	draws	a	bow	against	him,
Then	one	lays	the	bow	aside.
He	is	not	a	robber;	he	will	woo	at	the	right	time.
As	one	goes,	rain	falls;	then	good	fortune	comes.

Here	the	isolation	is	due	to	misunderstanding;	 it	 is	brought	about	not	by	outer	circumstances	but	by
inner	conditions.	A	man	misjudges	his	best	 friends,	 taking	 them	 to	be	as	unclean	as	a	dirty	pig	and	as
dangerous	 as	 a	 wagon	 full	 of	 devils.	 He	 adopts	 an	 attitude	 of	 defense.	 But	 in	 the	 end,	 realizing	 his
mistake,	he	lays	aside	the	bow,	perceiving	that	the	other	is	approaching	with	the	best	intentions	for	the
purpose	of	close	union.	Thus	 the	 tension	 is	relieved.	The	union	resolves	 the	 tension,	 just	as	 falling	rain
relieves	the	sultriness	preceding	a	thunderstorm.	All	goes	well,	for	just	when	opposition	reaches	its	climax
it	changes	over	to	its	antithesis.



39.	Chien	/	Obstruction

The	hexagram	pictures	a	dangerous	abyss	 lying	before	us	and	a	 steep,	 inaccessible	mountain	 rising
behind	us.	We	 are	 surrounded	by	 obstacles;	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 since	 the	mountain	 has	 the	 attribute	 of
keeping	 still,	 there	 is	 implicit	 a	 hint	 as	 to	 how	 we	 can	 extricate	 ourselves.	 The	 hexagram	 represents
obstructions	 that	 appear	 in	 the	 course	of	 time	but	 that	 can	and	 should	be	overcome.	Therefore	all	 the
instruction	given	is	directed	to	overcoming	them.

THE	JUDGMENT
OBSTRUCTION.	The	southwest	furthers.
The	northeast	does	not	further.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

The	southwest	is	the	region	of	retreat,	the	northeast	that	of	advance.	Here	an	individual	is	confronted
by	obstacles	that	cannot	be	overcome	directly.	In	such	a	situation	it	is	wise	to	pause	in	view	of	the	danger
and	 to	 retreat.	 However,	 this	 is	 merely	 a	 preparation	 for	 overcoming	 the	 obstructions.	 One	 must	 join
forces	with	friends	of	like	mind	and	put	himself	under	the	leadership	of	a	man	equal	to	the	situation:	then
one	will	succeed	in	removing	the	obstacles.	This	requires	the	will	to	persevere	just	when	one	apparently
must	do	something	that	leads	away	from	his	goal.	This	unswerving	inner	purpose	brings	good	fortune	in
the	 end.	 An	 obstruction	 that	 lasts	 only	 for	 a	 time	 is	 useful	 for	 self-development.	 This	 is	 the	 value	 of
adversity.

THE	IMAGE
Water	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	OBSTRUCTION.
Thus	the	superior	man	turns	his	attention	to	himself
And	molds	his	character.

Difficulties	and	obstructions	throw	a	man	back	upon	himself.	While	the	inferior	man	seeks	to	put	the
blame	on	other	persons,	bewailing	his	fate,	the	superior	man	seeks	the	error	within	himself,	and	through
this	introspection	the	external	obstacle	becomes	for	him	an	occasion	for	inner	enrichment	and	education.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Going	leads	to	obstructions,
Coming	meets	with	praise.

When	one	encounters	an	obstruction,	the	important	thing	is	to	reflect	on	how	best	to	deal	with	it.	When
threatened	with	danger,	one	should	not	strive	blindly	to	go	ahead,	for	this	only	leads	to	complications.	The
correct	thing	is,	on	the	contrary,	to	retreat	for	the	time	being,	not	in	order	to	give	up	the	struggle	but	to
await	the	right	moment	for	action.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	king’s	servant	is	beset	by	obstruction	upon	obstruction,
But	it	is	not	his	own	fault.

Ordinarily	it	is	best	to	go	around	an	obstacle	and	try	to	overcome	it	along	the	line	of	least	resistance.
But	 there	 is	one	 instance	 in	which	a	man	must	go	out	 to	meet	 the	 trouble,	even	 though	difficulty	piles
upon	difficulty:	this	is	when	the	path	of	duty	leads	directly	to	it—in	other	words,	when	he	cannot	act	of	his
own	volition	but	is	duty	bound	to	go	and	seek	out	danger	in	the	service	of	a	higher	cause.	Then	he	may	do
it	without	compunction,	because	it	is	not	through	any	fault	of	his	that	he	is	putting	himself	in	this	difficult
situation.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Going	leads	to	obstructions;
Hence	he	comes	back.

While	 the	 preceding	 line	 shows	 the	 official	 compelled	by	duty	 to	 follow	 the	way	 of	 danger,	 this	 line
shows	the	man	who	must	act	as	father	of	a	family	or	as	head	of	his	kin.	If	he	were	to	plunge	recklessly
into	danger,	it	would	be	a	useless	act,	because	those	entrusted	to	his	care	cannot	get	along	by	themselves.
But	if	he	withdraws	and	turns	back	to	his	own,	they	welcome	him	with	great	joy.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Going	leads	to	obstructions,
Coming	leads	to	union.

This	too	describes	a	situation	that	cannot	be	managed	singlehanded.	In	such	a	case	the	direct	way	is
not	 the	 shortest.	 If	 a	 person	 were	 to	 forge	 ahead	 on	 his	 own	 strength	 and	 without	 the	 necessary
preparations,	he	would	not	find	the	support	he	needs	and	would	realize	too	late	that	he	has	been	mistaken
in	 his	 calculations,	 inasmuch	 as	 the	 conditions	 on	 which	 he	 hoped	 he	 could	 rely	 would	 prove	 to	 be
inadequate.	 In	 this	 case	 it	 is	 better,	 therefore,	 to	 hold	 back	 for	 the	 time	 being	 and	 to	 gather	 together
trustworthy	companions	who	can	be	counted	upon	for	help	in	overcoming	the	obstructions.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
In	the	midst	of	the	greatest	obstructions,
Friends	come.



Here	 we	 see	 a	 man	 who	 is	 called	 to	 help	 in	 an	 emergency.	 He	 should	 not	 seek	 to	 evade	 the
obstructions,	no	matter	how	dangerously	they	pile	up	before	him.	But	because	he	is	really	called	to	the
task,	the	power	of	his	spirit	is	strong	enough	to	attract	helpers	whom	he	can	effectively	organize,	so	that
through	the	well-directed	co-operation	of	all	participants	the	obstruction	is	overcome.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Going	leads	to	obstructions,
Coming	leads	to	great	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.

This	 refers	 to	 a	 man	 who	 has	 already	 left	 the	 world	 and	 its	 tumult	 behind	 him.	 When	 the	 time	 of
obstructions	arrives,	it	might	seem	that	the	simplest	thing	for	him	to	do	would	be	to	turn	his	back	upon
the	 world	 and	 take	 refuge	 in	 the	 beyond.	 But	 this	 road	 is	 barred	 to	 him.	 He	 must	 not	 seek	 his	 own
salvation	and	abandon	the	world	to	its	adversity.	Duty	calls	him	back	once	more	into	the	turmoil	of	 life.
Precisely	 because	 of	 his	 experience	 and	 inner	 freedom,	 he	 is	 able	 to	 create	 something	 both	 great	 and
complete	that	brings	good	fortune.	And	it	is	favorable	to	see	the	great	man	in	alliance	with	whom	one	can
achieve	the	work	of	rescue.



40.	Hsieh	/	Deliverance

Here	the	movement	goes	out	of	the	sphere	of	danger.	The	obstacle	has	been	removed,	the	difficulties
are	 being	 resolved.	 Deliverance	 is	 not	 yet	 achieved;	 it	 is	 just	 in	 its	 beginning,	 and	 the	 hexagram
represents	its	various	stages.

THE	JUDGMENT
DELIVERANCE.	The	southwest	furthers.
If	there	is	no	longer	anything	where	one	has	to	go,
Return	brings	good	fortune.
If	there	is	still	something	where	one	has	to	go,
Hastening	brings	good	fortune.

This	refers	to	a	time	in	which	tensions	and	complications	begin	to	be	eased.	At	such	times	we	ought	to
make	our	way	back	 to	ordinary	 conditions	as	 soon	as	possible;	 this	 is	 the	meaning	of	 “the	 southwest.”
These	periods	of	sudden	change	have	great	importance.	Just	as	rain	relieves	atmospheric	tension,	making
all	 the	 buds	 burst	 open,	 so	 a	 time	 of	 deliverance	 from	 burdensome	 pressure	 has	 a	 liberating	 and
stimulating	effect	on	life.	One	thing	is	important,	however:	in	such	times	we	must	not	overdo	our	triumph.
The	point	 is	not	 to	push	on	 farther	 than	 is	necessary.	Returning	 to	 the	 regular	order	of	 life	as	 soon	as
deliverance	is	achieved	brings	good	fortune.	If	there	are	any	residual	matters	that	ought	to	be	attended
to,	it	should	be	done	as	quickly	as	possible,	so	that	a	clean	sweep	is	made	and	no	retardations	occur.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	and	rain	set	in:
The	image	of	DELIVERANCE.
Thus	the	superior	man	pardons	mistakes
And	forgives	misdeeds.

A	 thunderstorm	has	 the	 effect	 of	 clearing	 the	 air;	 the	 superior	man	 produces	 a	 similar	 effect	when
dealing	 with	 mistakes	 and	 sins	 of	 men	 that	 induce	 a	 condition	 of	 tension.	 Through	 clarity	 he	 brings
deliverance.	 However,	 when	 failings	 come	 to	 light,	 he	 does	 not	 dwell	 on	 them;	 he	 simply	 passes	 over
mistakes,	 the	 unintentional	 transgressions,	 just	 as	 thunder	 dies	 away.	 He	 forgives	 misdeeds,	 the
intentional	transgressions,	just	as	water	washes	everything	clean.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Without	blame.

In	keeping	with	the	situation,	few	words	are	needed.	The	hindrance	is	past,	deliverance	has	come.	One
recuperates	 in	 peace	 and	keeps	 still.	 This	 is	 the	 right	 thing	 to	 do	 in	 times	when	difficulties	 have	been
overcome.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
One	kills	three	foxes	in	the	field
And	receives	a	yellow	arrow.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

The	image	is	taken	from	the	hunt.	The	hunter	catches	three	cunning	foxes	and	receives	a	yellow	arrow
as	a	reward.	The	obstacles	 in	public	 life	are	 the	designing	 foxes	who	try	 to	 influence	the	ruler	 through
flattery.	They	must	be	removed	before	there	can	be	any	deliverance.	But	the	struggle	must	not	be	carried
on	 with	 the	 wrong	 weapons.	 The	 yellow	 color	 points	 to	measure	 and	mean	 in	 proceeding	 against	 the
enemy;	 the	 arrow	 signifies	 the	 straight	 course.	 If	 one	 devotes	 himself	 wholeheartedly	 to	 the	 task	 of
deliverance,	he	develops	so	much	 inner	strength	 from	his	rectitude	 that	 it	acts	as	a	weapon	against	all
that	is	false	and	low.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
If	a	man	carries	a	burden	on	his	back
And	nonetheless	rides	in	a	carriage,
He	thereby	encourages	robbers	to	draw	near.
Perseverance	leads	to	humiliation.

This	refers	to	a	man	who	has	come	out	of	needy	circumstances	into	comfort	and	freedom	from	want.	If
now,	in	the	manner	of	an	upstart,	he	tries	to	take	his	ease	in	comfortable	surroundings	that	do	not	suit	his
nature,	 he	 thereby	 attracts	 robbers.	 If	 he	 goes	 on	 thus	 he	 is	 sure	 to	 bring	 disgrace	 upon	 himself.
Confucius	says	about	this	line:
“Carrying	a	burden	on	the	back	is	the	business	of	a	common	man;	a	carriage	is	the	appurtenance	of	a

man	of	rank.	Now,	when	a	common	man	uses	the	appurtenance	of	a	man	of	rank,	robbers	plot	to	take	it
away	from	him.	If	a	man	is	 insolent	toward	those	above	him	and	hard	toward	those	below	him,	robbers
plot	to	attack	him.	Carelessness	in	guarding	things	tempts	thieves	to	steal.	Sumptuous	ornaments	worn	by
a	maiden	are	an	enticement	to	rob	her	of	her	virtue.”

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Deliver	yourself	from	your	great	toe.
Then	the	companion	comes,
And	him	you	can	trust.



In	 times	 of	 standstill	 it	 will	 happen	 that	 inferior	 people	 attach	 themselves	 to	 a	 superior	 man,	 and
through	force	of	daily	habit	they	may	grow	very	close	to	him	and	become	indispensable,	just	as	the	big	toe
is	indispensable	to	the	foot	because	it	makes	walking	easier.	But	when	the	time	of	deliverance	draws	near,
with	 its	 call	 to	 deeds,	 a	man	must	 free	himself	 from	 such	 chance	 acquaintances	with	whom	he	has	no
inner	 connection.	 For	 otherwise	 the	 friends	 who	 share	 his	 views,	 on	 whom	 he	 could	 really	 rely	 and
together	with	whom	he	could	accomplish	something,	mistrust	him	and	stay	away.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
If	only	the	superior	man	can	deliver	himself,
It	brings	good	fortune.
Thus	he	proves	to	inferior	men	that	he	is	in	earnest.

Times	of	deliverance	demand	inner	resolve.	Inferior	people	cannot	be	driven	off	by	prohibitions	or	any
external	means.	 If	 one	desires	 to	 be	 rid	 of	 them,	 he	must	 first	 break	 completely	with	 them	 in	 his	 own
mind;	they	will	see	for	themselves	that	he	is	in	earnest	and	will	withdraw.

Six	at	the	top	means:
The	prince	shoots	at	a	hawk	on	a	high	wall.
He	kills	it.	Everything	serves	to	further.

The	hawk	on	a	high	wall	 is	 the	symbol	of	a	powerful	 inferior	 in	a	high	position	who	 is	hindering	the
deliverance.	He	withstands	the	 force	of	 inner	 influences,	because	he	 is	hardened	 in	his	wickedness.	He
must	be	forcibly	removed,	and	this	requires	appropriate	means.	Confucius	says	about	this	line:
“The	hawk	 is	 the	object	of	 the	hunt;	bow	and	arrow	are	the	tools	and	means.	The	marksman	 is	man

(who	must	make	proper	use	of	 the	means	to	his	end).	The	superior	man	contains	the	means	 in	his	own
person.	He	bides	his	 time	and	 then	acts.	Why	 then	should	not	everything	go	well?	He	acts	and	 is	 free.
Therefore	all	he	has	to	do	is	to	go	forth,	and	he	takes	his	quarry.	This	is	how	a	man	fares	who	acts	after	he
has	made	ready	the	means.”



41.	Sun	/	Decrease

This	hexagram	represents	a	decrease	of	the	lower	trigram	in	favor	of	the	upper,	because	the	third	line,
originally	 strong,	 has	moved	up	 to	 the	 top,	 and	 the	 top	 line,	 originally	weak,	 has	 replaced	 it.1	What	 is
below	is	decreased	to	the	benefit	of	what	 is	above.	This	 is	out-and-out	decrease.	If	 the	foundations	of	a
building	are	decreased	 in	 strength	and	 the	upper	walls	are	 strengthened,	 the	whole	 structure	 loses	 its
stability.	Likewise,	a	decrease	 in	 the	prosperity	of	 the	people	 in	 favor	of	 the	government	 is	out-and-out
decrease.	And	the	entire	theme	of	the	hexagram	is	directed	to	showing	how	this	shift	of	wealth	can	take
place	without	causing	the	sources	of	wealth	in	the	nation	and	its	lower	classes	to	fail.

THE	JUDGMENT
DECREASE	combined	with	sincerity
Brings	about	supreme	good	fortune
Without	blame.
One	may	be	persevering	in	this.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
How	is	this	to	be	carried	out?
One	may	use	two	small	bowls	for	the	sacrifice.

Decrease	does	not	under	all	circumstances	mean	something	bad.	Increase	and	decrease	come	in	their
own	 time.	What	matters	here	 is	 to	understand	 the	 time	and	not	 to	 try	 to	 cover	up	poverty	with	empty
pretense.	If	a	time	of	scanty	resources	brings	out	an	inner	truth,	one	must	not	feel	ashamed	of	simplicity.
For	simplicity	 is	 then	the	very	thing	needed	to	provide	 inner	strength	 for	 further	undertakings.	 Indeed,
there	need	be	no	concern	if	the	outward	beauty	of	the	civilization,	even	the	elaboration	of	religious	forms,
should	 have	 to	 suffer	 because	 of	 simplicity.	 One	 must	 draw	 on	 the	 strength	 of	 the	 inner	 attitude	 to
compensate	for	what	is	lacking	in	externals;	then	the	power	of	the	content	makes	up	for	the	simplicity	of
form.	There	is	no	need	of	presenting	false	appearances	to	God.	Even	with	slender	means,	the	sentiment	of
the	heart	can	be	expressed.2

THE	IMAGE
At	the	foot	of	the	mountain,	the	lake:
The	image	of	DECREASE.
Thus	the	superior	man	controls	his	anger
And	restrains	his	instincts.

The	lake	at	the	foot	of	the	mountain	evaporates.	In	this	way	it	decreases	to	the	benefit	of	the	mountain,
which	 is	 enriched	by	 its	moisture.	 The	mountain	 stands	 as	 the	 symbol	 of	 a	 stubborn	 strength	 that	 can
harden	into	anger.	The	lake	is	the	symbol	of	unchecked	gaiety	that	can	develop	into	passionate	drives	at
the	expense	of	the	life	forces.	Therefore	decrease	is	necessary;	anger	must	be	decreased	by	keeping	still,
the	instincts	must	be	curbed	by	restriction.	By	this	decrease	of	the	lower	powers	of	the	psyche,	the	higher
aspects	of	the	soul	are	enriched.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Going	quickly	when	one’s	tasks	are	finished
Is	without	blame.
But	one	must	reflect	on	how	much	one	may	decrease	others.

It	 is	unselfish	and	good	when	a	man,	after	completing	his	own	urgent	tasks,	uses	his	strength	in	the
service	of	others,	and	without	bragging	or	making	much	of	it,	helps	quickly	where	help	is	needed.	But	the
man	in	a	superior	position	who	is	thus	aided	must	weigh	carefully	how	much	he	can	accept	without	doing
the	helpful	servant	or	 friend	real	harm.	Only	where	such	delicacy	of	 feeling	exists	can	one	give	oneself
unconditionally	and	without	hesitation.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Perseverance	furthers.
To	undertake	something	brings	misfortune.
Without	decreasing	oneself,
One	is	able	to	bring	increase	to	others.

A	high-minded	self-awareness	and	a	consistent	seriousness	with	no	forfeit	of	dignity	are	necessary	if	a
man	wants	to	be	of	service	to	others.	He	who	throws	himself	away	in	order	to	do	the	bidding	of	a	superior
diminishes	his	own	position	without	thereby	giving	lasting	benefit	to	the	other.	This	is	wrong.	To	render
true	service	of	lasting	value	to	another,	one	must	serve	him	without	relinquishing	oneself.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
When	three	people	journey	together,
Their	number	decreases	by	one.
When	one	man	journeys	alone,
He	finds	a	companion.

When	there	are	three	people	together,	jealousy	arises.	One	of	them	will	have	to	go.	A	very	close	bond	is
possible	 only	 between	 two	people.	But	when	 one	man	 is	 lonely,	 he	 is	 certain	 to	 find	 a	 companion	who
complements	him.



Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
If	a	man	decreases	his	faults,
It	makes	the	other	hasten	to	come	and	rejoice.
No	blame.

A	 man’s	 faults	 often	 prevent	 even	 well-disposed	 people	 from	 coming	 closer	 to	 him.	 His	 faults	 are
sometimes	reinforced	by	the	environment	in	which	he	lives.	But	if	in	humility	he	can	bring	himself	to	the
point	 of	 giving	 them	up,	 he	 frees	his	well-disposed	 friends	 from	an	 inner	pressure	 and	 causes	 them	 to
approach	the	more	quickly,	and	there	is	mutual	joy.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Someone	does	indeed	increase	him.
Ten	pairs	of	tortoises	cannot	oppose	it.
Supreme	good	fortune.

If	someone	 is	marked	out	by	 fate	 for	good	fortune,	 it	comes	without	 fail.	All	oracles—as	for	 instance
those	 that	are	read	 from	the	shells	of	 tortoises—are	bound	 to	concur	 in	giving	him	 favorable	signs.	He
need	fear	nothing,	because	his	luck	is	ordained	from	on	high.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
If	one	is	increased	without	depriving	others,
There	is	no	blame.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
One	obtains	servants
But	no	longer	has	a	separate	home.

There	are	people	who	dispense	blessings	to	 the	whole	world.	Every	 increase	 in	power	that	comes	to
them	 benefits	 the	 whole	 of	 mankind	 and	 therefore	 does	 not	 bring	 decrease	 to	 others.	 Through
perseverance	and	zealous	work	a	man	wins	success	and	 finds	helpers	as	 they	are	needed.	But	what	he
accomplishes	is	not	a	limited	private	advantage;	it	is	a	public	good	and	available	to	everyone.



42.	I	/	Increase

The	idea	of	increase	is	expressed	in	the	fact	that	the	strong	lowest	line	of	the	upper	trigram	has	sunk
down	and	taken	its	place	under	the	lower	trigram.	This	conception	also	expresses	the	fundamental	idea	on
which	the	Book	of	Changes	is	based.	To	rule	truly	is	to	serve.
A	 sacrifice	 of	 the	 higher	 element	 that	 produces	 an	 increase	 of	 the	 lower	 is	 called	 an	 out-and-out

increase:	it	indicates	the	spirit	that	alone	has	power	to	help	the	world.
THE	JUDGMENT
INCREASE.	It	furthers	one
To	undertake	something.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.

Sacrifice	on	the	part	of	those	above	for	the	increase	of	those	below	fills	the	people	with	a	sense	of	joy
and	gratitude	 that	 is	extremely	valuable	 for	 the	 flowering	of	 the	commonwealth.	When	people	are	 thus
devoted	 to	 their	 leaders,	 undertakings	 are	 possible,	 and	 even	 difficult	 and	 dangerous	 enterprises	 will
succeed.	 Therefore	 in	 such	 times	 of	 progress	 and	 successful	 development	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 work	 and
make	the	best	use	of	the	time.	This	time	resembles	that	of	the	marriage	of	heaven	and	earth,	when	the
earth	 partakes	 of	 the	 creative	 power	 of	 heaven,	 forming	 and	 bringing	 forth	 living	 beings.	 The	 time	 of
INCREASE	does	not	endure,	therefore	it	must	be	utilized	while	it	lasts.

THE	IMAGE
Wind	and	thunder:	the	image	of
INCREASE.
Thus	the	superior	man:
If	he	sees	good,	he	imitates	it;
If	he	has	faults,	he	rids	himself	of	them.

While	observing	how	thunder	and	wind	increase	and	strengthen	each	other,	a	man	can	note	the	way	to
self-increase	and	self-improvement.	When	he	discovers	good	in	others,	he	should	imitate	it	and	thus	make
everything	on	earth	his	own.	If	he	perceives	something	bad	in	himself,	let	him	rid	himself	of	it.	In	this	way
he	becomes	free	of	evil.	This	ethical	change	represents	the	most	important	increase	of	personality.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
It	furthers	one	to	accomplish	great	deeds.
Supreme	good	fortune.	No	blame.

If	great	help	comes	to	a	man	from	on	high,	this	increased	strength	must	be	used	to	achieve	something
great	 for	which	he	might	otherwise	never	have	 found	energy,	 or	 readiness	 to	 take	 responsibility.	Great
good	 fortune	 is	produced	by	selflessness,	and	 in	bringing	about	great	good	 fortune,	he	 remains	 free	of
reproach.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Someone	does	indeed	increase	him;
Ten	pairs	of	tortoises	cannot	oppose	it.
Constant	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
The	king	presents	him	before	God.
Good	fortune.

A	 man	 brings	 about	 real	 increase	 by	 producing	 in	 himself	 the	 conditions	 for	 it,	 that	 is,	 through
receptivity	 to	 and	 love	 of	 the	 good.	 Thus	 the	 thing	 for	 which	 he	 strives	 comes	 of	 itself,	 with	 the
inevitability	of	natural	 law.	Where	 increase	 is	 thus	 in	harmony	with	 the	highest	 laws	of	 the	universe,	 it
cannot	 be	 prevented	 by	 any	 constellation	 of	 accidents.	 But	 everything	 depends	 on	 his	 not	 letting
unexpected	 good	 fortune	 make	 him	 heedless;	 he	 must	 make	 it	 his	 own	 through	 inner	 strength	 and
steadfastness.	 Then	 he	 acquires	meaning	 before	 God	 and	man,	 and	 can	 accomplish	 something	 for	 the
good	of	the	world.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
One	is	enriched	through	unfortunate	events.
No	blame,	if	you	are	sincere
And	walk	in	the	middle,
And	report	with	a	seal	to	the	prince.

A	 time	of	blessing	and	enrichment	has	such	powerful	effects	 that	even	events	ordinarily	unfortunate
must	 turn	out	 to	 the	advantage	of	 those	affected	by	 them.	These	persons	become	 free	of	error,	and	by
acting	in	harmony	with	truth	they	gain	such	inner	authority	that	they	exert	influence	as	if	sanctioned	by
letter	and	seal.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
If	you	walk	in	the	middle
And	report	to	the	prince,
He	will	follow.
It	furthers	one	to	be	used
In	the	removal	of	the	capital.



It	is	important	that	there	should	be	men	who	mediate	between	leaders	and	followers.	These	should	be
disinterested	people,	especially	in	times	of	increase,	since	the	benefit	is	to	spread	from	the	leader	to	the
people.	Nothing	of	this	benefit	should	be	held	back	in	a	selfish	way;	it	should	really	reach	those	for	whom
it	 is	 intended.	This	sort	of	 intermediary,	who	also	exercises	a	good	influence	on	the	leader,	 is	especially
important	 in	 times	when	 it	 is	 a	matter	of	great	undertakings,	decisive	 for	 the	 future	and	 requiring	 the
inner	assent	of	all	concerned.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
If	in	truth	you	have	a	kind	heart,	ask	not.
Supreme	good	fortune.
Truly,	kindness	will	be	recognized	as	your	virtue.

True	kindness	does	not	count	upon	nor	ask	about	merit	and	gratitude	but	acts	 from	 inner	necessity.
And	such	a	truly	kind	heart	finds	itself	rewarded	in	being	recognized,	and	thus	the	beneficent	influence
will	spread	unhindered.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
He	brings	increase	to	no	one.
Indeed,	someone	even	strikes	him.
He	does	not	keep	his	heart	constantly	steady.
Misfortune.

The	 meaning	 here	 is	 that	 through	 renunciation	 those	 in	 high	 place	 should	 bring	 increase	 to	 those
below.	By	neglecting	this	duty	and	helping	no	one,	they	in	turn	lose	the	furthering	influence	of	others	and
soon	find	themselves	alone.	In	this	way	they	invite	attacks.	An	attitude	not	permanently	in	harmony	with
the	demands	of	the	time	will	necessarily	bring	misfortune	with	it.	Confucius	says	about	this	line:
“The	superior	man	sets	his	person	at	rest	before	he	moves;	he	composes	his	mind	before	he	speaks;	he

makes	his	relations	firm	before	he	asks	for	something.	By	attending	to	these	three	matters,	the	superior
man	gains	complete	security.	But	if	a	man	is	brusque	in	his	movements,	others	will	not	co-operate.	If	he	is
agitated	 in	 his	 words,	 they	 awaken	 no	 echo	 in	 others.	 If	 he	 asks	 for	 something	 without	 having	 first
established	relations,	it	will	not	be	given	to	him.	If	no	one	is	with	him,	those	who	would	harm	him	draw
near.”



43.	Kuai	/	Break-through	(Resoluteness)

This	hexagram	signifies	on	 the	one	hand	a	break-through	after	a	 long	accumulation	of	 tension,	 as	a
swollen	river	breaks	 through	 its	dikes,	or	 in	 the	manner	of	a	cloudburst.	On	the	other	hand,	applied	 to
human	conditions,	it	refers	to	the	time	when	inferior	people	gradually	begin	to	disappear.	Their	influence
is	 on	 the	 wane;	 as	 a	 result	 of	 resolute	 action,	 a	 change	 in	 conditions	 occurs,	 a	 break-through.	 The
hexagram	is	linked	with	the	third	month	[April–May].

THE	JUDGMENT
BREAK-THROUGH.	One	must	resolutely	make	the	matter	known
At	the	court	of	the	king.
It	must	be	announced	truthfully.	Danger.
It	is	necessary	to	notify	one’s	own	city.
It	does	not	further	to	resort	to	arms.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.

Even	if	only	one	inferior	man	is	occupying	a	ruling	position	in	a	city,	he	is	able	to	oppress	superior	men.
Even	a	single	passion	still	 lurking	in	the	heart	has	power	to	obscure	reason.	Passion	and	reason	cannot
exist	side	by	side—therefore	fight	without	quarter	is	necessary	if	the	good	is	to	prevail.

In	 a	 resolute	 struggle	 of	 the	 good	 against	 evil,	 there	 are,	 however,	 definite	 rules	 that	 must	 not	 be
disregarded,	 if	 it	 is	to	succeed.	First,	 resolution	must	be	based	on	a	union	of	strength	and	 friendliness.
Second,	a	compromise	with	evil	is	not	possible;	evil	must	under	all	circumstances	be	openly	discredited.
Nor	must	our	own	passions	and	shortcomings	be	glossed	over.	Third,	the	struggle	must	not	be	carried	on
directly	by	force.	 If	evil	 is	branded,	 it	 thinks	of	weapons,	and	 if	we	do	 it	 the	favor	of	 fighting	against	 it
blow	 for	 blow,	 we	 lose	 in	 the	 end	 because	 thus	 we	 ourselves	 get	 entangled	 in	 hatred	 and	 passion.
Therefore	it	is	important	to	begin	at	home,	to	be	on	guard	in	our	own	persons	against	the	faults	we	have
branded.	In	this	way,	finding	no	opponent,	the	sharp	edges	of	the	weapons	of	evil	become	dulled.	For	the
same	 reasons	 we	 should	 not	 combat	 our	 own	 faults	 directly.	 As	 long	 as	 we	 wrestle	 with	 them,	 they
continue	victorious.	Finally,	the	best	way	to	fight	evil	is	to	make	energetic	progress	in	the	good.

THE	IMAGE
The	lake	has	risen	up	to	heaven:
The	image	of	BREAK-THROUGH.
Thus	the	superior	man
Dispenses	riches	downward
And	refrains	from	resting	on	his	virtue.

When	the	water	of	a	lake	has	risen	up	to	heaven,	there	is	reason	to	fear	a	cloudburst.	Taking	this	as	a
warning,	the	superior	man	forestalls	a	violent	collapse.	If	a	man	were	to	pile	up	riches	for	himself	alone,
without	 considering	 others,	 he	 would	 certainly	 experience	 a	 collapse.	 For	 all	 gathering	 is	 followed	 by
dispersion.	Therefore	the	superior	man	begins	to	distribute	while	he	is	accumulating.	In	the	same	way,	in
developing	his	character	he	takes	care	not	to	become	hardened	in	obstinacy	but	to	remain	receptive	to
impressions	by	help	of	strict	and	continuous	self-examination.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Mighty	in	the	forward-striding	toes.
When	one	goes	and	is	not	equal	to	the	task,
One	makes	a	mistake.

In	times	of	a	resolute	advance,	the	beginning	is	especially	difficult.	We	feel	inspired	to	press	forward
but	resistance	is	still	strong;	therefore	we	ought	to	gauge	our	own	strength	and	venture	only	so	far	as	we
can	go	with	certainty	of	success.	To	plunge	blindly	ahead	is	wrong,	because	it	is	precisely	at	the	beginning
that	an	unexpected	setback	can	have	the	most	disastrous	results.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
A	cry	of	alarm.	Arms	at	evening	and	at	night.
Fear	nothing.

Readiness	is	everything.	Resolution	is	indissolubly	bound	up	with	caution.	If	an	individual	is	careful	and
keeps	 his	wits	 about	 him,	 he	 need	 not	 become	 excited	 or	 alarmed.	 If	 he	 is	watchful	 at	 all	 times,	 even
before	danger	is	present,	he	is	armed	when	danger	approaches	and	need	not	be	afraid.	The	superior	man
is	 on	 his	 guard	 against	 what	 is	 not	 yet	 in	 sight	 and	 on	 the	 alert	 for	 what	 is	 not	 yet	 within	 hearing;
therefore	 he	 dwells	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 difficulties	 as	 though	 they	 did	 not	 exist.	 If	 a	 man	 develops	 his
character,	 people	 submit	 to	 him	 of	 their	 own	 accord.	 If	 reason	 triumphs,	 the	 passions	 withdraw	 of
themselves.	To	be	circumspect	and	not	to	forget	one’s	armor	is	the	right	way	to	security.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
To	be	powerful	in	the	cheekbones
Brings	misfortune.
The	superior	man	is	firmly	resolved.
He	walks	alone	and	is	caught	in	the	rain.
He	is	bespattered,



And	people	murmur	against	him.
No	blame.

Here	we	have	a	man	in	an	ambiguous	situation.	While	all	others	are	engaged	in	a	resolute	fight	against
all	that	is	inferior,	he	alone	has	a	certain	relationship	with	an	inferior	man.	If	he	were	to	show	strength
outwardly	and	turn	against	this	man	before	the	time	is	ripe,	he	would	only	endanger	the	entire	situation,
because	the	inferior	man	would	too	quickly	have	recourse	to	countermeasures.	The	task	of	the	superior
man	becomes	extremely	difficult	here.	He	must	be	firmly	resolved	within	himself	and,	while	maintaining
association	with	the	inferior	man,	avoid	any	participation	in	his	vileness.	He	will	of	course	be	misjudged.
It	will	be	thought	that	he	belongs	to	the	party	of	the	inferior	man.	He	will	be	lonely	because	no	one	will
understand	him.	His	relations	with	the	inferior	man	will	sully	him	in	the	eyes	of	the	multitude,	and	they
will	 turn	 against	 him,	 grumbling.	 But	 he	 can	 endure	 this	 lack	 of	 appreciation	 and	makes	 no	mistake,
because	he	remains	true	to	himself.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
There	is	no	skin	on	his	thighs,
And	walking	comes	hard.
If	a	man	were	to	let	himself	be	led	like	a	sheep,
Remorse	would	disappear.
But	if	these	words	are	heard
They	will	not	be	believed.

Here	a	man	is	suffering	from	inner	restlessness	and	cannot	abide	in	his	place.	He	would	like	to	push
forward	 under	 any	 circumstances,	 but	 encounters	 insuperable	 obstacles.	 Thus	 his	 situation	 entails	 an
inner	conflict.	This	is	due	to	the	obstinacy	with	which	he	seeks	to	enforce	his	will.	If	he	would	desist	from
this	obstinacy,	everything	would	go	well.	But	this	advice,	like	so	much	other	good	counsel,	will	be	ignored.
For	obstinacy	makes	a	man	unable	to	hear,	for	all	that	he	has	ears.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
In	dealing	with	weeds,
Firm	resolution	is	necessary.
Walking	in	the	middle
Remains	free	of	blame.

Weeds	always	grow	back	again	and	are	difficult	to	exterminate.	So	too	the	struggle	against	an	inferior
man	in	a	high	position	demands	firm	resolution.	One	has	certain	relations	with	him,	hence	there	is	danger
that	one	may	give	up	the	struggle	as	hopeless.	But	this	must	not	be.	One	must	go	on	resolutely	and	not
allow	himself	to	be	deflected	from	his	course.	Only	in	this	way	does	one	remain	free	of	blame.

Six	at	the	top	means:
No	cry.
In	the	end	misfortune	comes.

Victory	 seems	 to	 have	 been	 achieved.	 There	 remains	merely	 a	 remnant	 of	 the	 evil	 resolutely	 to	 be
eradicated	as	the	time	demands.	Everything	looks	easy.	Just	there,	however,	lies	the	danger.	If	we	are	not
on	 guard,	 evil	 will	 succeed	 in	 escaping	 by	 means	 of	 concealment,	 and	 when	 it	 has	 eluded	 us	 new
misfortunes	will	develop	from	the	remaining	seeds,	for	evil	does	not	die	easily.	So	too	in	dealing	with	the
evil	in	one’s	own	character,	one	must	go	to	work	with	thoroughness.	If	out	of	carelessness	anything	were
to	be	overlooked,	new	evil	would	arise	from	it.



44.	Kou	/	Coming	to	Meet

This	hexagram	indicates	a	situation	in	which	the	principle	of	darkness,	after	having	been	eliminated,
furtively	and	unexpectedly	obtrudes	again	from	within	and	below.	Of	its	own	accord	the	female	principle
comes	 to	 meet	 the	 male.	 It	 is	 an	 unfavorable	 and	 dangerous	 situation,	 and	 we	 must	 understand	 and
promptly	prevent	the	possible	consequences.

The	hexagram	is	linked	with	the	fifth	month	[June–July],	because	at	the	summer	solstice	the	principle
of	darkness	gradually	becomes	ascendant	again.

THE	JUDGMENT
COMING	TO	MEET.	The	maiden	is	powerful.
One	should	not	marry	such	a	maiden.

The	 rise	 of	 the	 inferior	 element	 is	 pictured	 here	 in	 the	 image	 of	 a	 bold	 girl	who	 lightly	 surrenders
herself	and	thus	seizes	power.	This	would	not	be	possible	if	the	strong	and	light-giving	element	had	not	in
turn	come	halfway.	The	inferior	thing	seems	so	harmless	and	inviting	that	a	man	delights	in	it;	it	looks	so
small	and	weak	that	he	imagines	he	may	dally	with	it	and	come	to	no	harm.

The	inferior	man	rises	only	because	the	superior	man	does	not	regard	him	as	dangerous	and	so	lends
him	power.	If	he	were	resisted	from	the	first,	he	could	never	gain	influence.

The	time	of	COMING	TO	MEET	is	important	in	still	another	way.	Although	as	a	general	rule	the	weak
should	not	come	to	meet	the	strong,	there	are	times	when	this	has	great	significance.	When	heaven	and
earth	come	to	meet	each	other,	all	creatures	prosper;	when	a	prince	and	his	official	come	to	meet	each
other,	 the	 world	 is	 put	 in	 order.	 It	 is	 necessary	 for	 elements	 predestined	 to	 be	 joined	 and	 mutually
dependent	 to	 come	 to	 meet	 one	 another	 halfway.	 But	 the	 coming	 together	 must	 be	 free	 of	 dishonest
ulterior	motives,	otherwise	harm	will	result.

THE	IMAGE
Under	heaven,	wind:
The	image	of	COMING	TO	MEET.
Thus	does	the	prince	act	when	disseminating	his	commands
And	proclaiming	them	to	the	four	quarters	of	heaven.

The	situation	here	resembles	that	in	hexagram	20,	Kuan,	CONTEMPLATION	(VIEW).	In	the	latter	the
wind	blows	over	the	earth,	here	it	blows	under	heaven;	in	both	cases	it	goes	everywhere.	There	the	wind
is	on	the	earth	and	symbolizes	the	ruler	taking	note	of	the	conditions	in	his	kingdom;	here	the	wind	blows
from	above	and	symbolizes	the	influence	exercised	by	the	ruler	through	his	commands.	Heaven	is	far	from
the	things	of	earth,	but	it	sets	them	in	motion	by	means	of	the	wind.	The	ruler	is	far	from	his	people,	but
he	sets	them	in	motion	by	means	of	his	commands	and	decrees.

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning	means:
It	must	be	checked	with	a	brake	of	bronze.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
If	one	lets	it	take	its	course,	one	experiences	misfortune.
Even	a	lean	pig	has	it	in	him	to	rage	around.

If	an	inferior	element	has	wormed	its	way	in,	it	must	be	energetically	checked	at	once.	By	consistently
checking	it,	bad	effects	can	be	avoided.	If	 it	 is	allowed	to	take	its	course,	misfortune	is	bound	to	result;
the	 insignificance	of	 that	which	creeps	 in	 should	not	be	a	 temptation	 to	underrate	 it.	A	pig	 that	 is	 still
young	and	lean	cannot	rage	around	much,	but	after	it	has	eaten	its	fill	and	become	strong,	its	true	nature
comes	out	if	it	has	not	previously	been	curbed.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
There	is	a	fish	in	the	tank.	No	blame.
Does	not	further	guests.

The	inferior	element	is	not	overcome	by	violence	but	is	kept	under	gentle	control.	Then	nothing	evil	is
to	be	feared.	But	care	must	be	taken	not	to	let	it	come	in	contact	with	those	further	away,	because	once
free	it	would	unfold	its	evil	aspects	unchecked.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
There	is	no	skin	on	his	thighs,
And	walking	comes	hard.
If	one	is	mindful	of	the	danger,
No	great	mistake	is	made.

There	 is	 a	 temptation	 to	 fall	 in	 with	 the	 evil	 element	 offering	 itself—a	 very	 dangerous	 situation.
Fortunately	 circumstances	 prevent	 this;	 one	 would	 like	 to	 do	 it,	 but	 cannot.	 This	 leads	 to	 painful
indecision	in	behavior.	But	if	we	gain	clear	insight	into	the	danger	of	the	situation,	we	shall	at	least	avoid
more	serious	mistakes.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
No	fish	in	the	tank.
This	leads	to	misfortune.

Insignificant	people	must	be	tolerated	in	order	to	keep	them	well	disposed.	Then	we	can	make	use	of



them	if	we	should	need	them.	If	we	become	alienated	from	them	and	do	not	meet	them	halfway,	they	turn
their	backs	on	us	and	are	not	at	our	disposal	when	we	need	them.	But	this	is	our	own	fault.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
A	melon	covered	with	willow	leaves.
Hidden	lines.
Then	it	drops	down	to	one	from	heaven.

The	melon,	like	the	fish,	is	a	symbol	of	the	principle	of	darkness.	It	 is	sweet	but	spoils	easily	and	for
this	reason	is	protected	with	a	cover	of	willow	leaves.	This	is	a	situation	in	which	a	strong,	superior,	well-
poised	man	tolerates	and	protects	the	inferiors	in	his	charge.	He	has	the	firm	lines	of	order	and	beauty
within	himself	but	he	does	not	 lay	stress	upon	them.	He	does	not	bother	his	subordinates	with	outward
show	or	tiresome	admonitions	but	leaves	them	quite	free,	putting	his	trust	in	the	transforming	power	of	a
strong	and	upright	personality.	And	behold!	Fate	is	favorable.	His	inferiors	respond	to	his	 influence	and
fall	to	his	disposition	like	ripe	fruit.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
He	comes	to	meet	with	his	horns.
Humiliation.	No	blame.

When	a	man	has	withdrawn	 from	 the	world,	 its	 tumult	often	becomes	unbearable	 to	him.	There	are
many	 people	 who	 in	 a	 noble	 pride	 hold	 themselves	 aloof	 from	 all	 that	 is	 low	 and	 rebuff	 it	 brusquely
wherever	 it	 comes	 to	meet	 them.	 Such	 persons	 are	 reproached	 for	 being	 proud	 and	 distant,	 but	 since
active	duties	no	longer	hold	them	to	the	world,	this	does	not	greatly	matter.	They	know	how	to	bear	the
dislike	of	the	masses	with	composure.



45.	Ts’ui	/	Gathering	Together	[Massing]

This	hexagram	is	related	in	form	and	meaning	to	Pi,	HOLDING	TOGETHER	(8).	In	the	latter,	water	is
over	the	earth;	here	a	lake	is	over	the	earth.	But	since	the	lake	is	a	place	where	water	collects,	the	idea	of
gathering	together	is	even	more	strongly	expressed	here	than	in	the	other	hexagram.	The	same	idea	also
arises	from	the	fact	that	in	the	present	case	it	is	two	strong	lines	(the	fourth	and	the	fifth)	that	bring	about
the	gathering	together,	whereas	in	the	former	case	one	strong	line	(the	fifth)	stands	in	the	midst	of	weak
lines.

THE	JUDGMENT
GATHERING	TOGETHER.	Success.
The	king	approaches	his	temple.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
This	brings	success.	Perseverance	furthers.
To	bring	great	offerings	creates	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.

The	gathering	together	of	people	in	large	communities	is	either	a	natural	occurrence,	as	in	the	case	of
the	family,	or	an	artificial	one,	as	in	the	case	of	the	state.	The	family	gathers	about	the	father	as	its	head.
The	perpetuation	of	this	gathering	in	groups	is	achieved	through	the	sacrifice	to	the	ancestors,	at	which
the	whole	clan	is	gathered	together.	Through	the	collective	piety	of	the	living	members	of	the	family,	the
ancestors	become	so	integrated	in	the	spiritual	life	of	the	family	that	it	cannot	be	dispersed	or	dissolved.

Where	men	are	to	be	gathered	together,	religious	forces	are	needed.	But	there	must	also	be	a	human
leader	to	serve	as	the	center	of	the	group.	In	order	to	be	able	to	bring	others	together,	this	leader	must
first	of	all	be	collected	within	himself.	Only	collective	moral	force	can	unite	the	world.	Such	great	times	of
unification	will	leave	great	achievements	behind	them.	This	is	the	significance	of	the	great	offerings	that
are	 made.	 In	 the	 secular	 sphere	 likewise	 there	 is	 need	 of	 great	 deeds	 in	 the	 time	 of	 GATHERING
TOGETHER.

THE	IMAGE
Over	the	earth,	the	lake:
The	image	of	GATHERING	TOGETHER.
Thus	the	superior	man	renews	his	weapons
In	order	to	meet	the	unforeseen.

If	 the	 water	 in	 the	 lake	 gathers	 until	 it	 rises	 above	 the	 earth,	 there	 is	 danger	 of	 a	 break-through.
Precautions	must	be	taken	to	prevent	this.	Similarly	where	men	gather	together	in	great	numbers,	strife
is	 likely	 to	 arise;	 where	 possessions	 are	 collected,	 robbery	 is	 likely	 to	 occur.	 Thus	 in	 the	 time	 of
GATHERING	TOGETHER	we	must	arm	promptly	to	ward	off	the	unexpected.	Human	woes	usually	come
as	a	 result	 of	unexpected	events	against	which	we	are	not	 forearmed.	 If	we	are	prepared,	 they	can	be
prevented.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
If	you	are	sincere,	but	not	to	the	end,
There	will	sometimes	be	confusion,	sometimes	gathering	together.
If	you	call	out,
Then	after	one	grasp	of	the	hand	you	can	laugh	again.
Regret	not.	Going	is	without	blame.

The	situation	is	this:	people	desire	to	gather	around	a	leader	to	whom	they	look	up.	But	they	are	in	a
large	group,	by	which	they	allow	themselves	to	be	influenced,	so	that	they	waver	in	their	decision.	Thus
they	lack	a	firm	center	around	which	to	gather.	But	if	expression	is	given	to	this	need,	and	if	they	call	for
help,	one	grasp	of	the	hand	from	the	leader	is	enough	to	turn	away	all	distress.	Therefore	they	must	not
allow	themselves	to	be	led	astray.	It	is	undoubtedly	right	that	they	should	attach	themselves	to	this	leader.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Letting	oneself	be	drawn
Brings	good	fortune	and	remains	blameless.
If	one	is	sincere,
It	furthers	one	to	bring	even	a	small	offering.

In	 the	 time	 of	 GATHERING	 TOGETHER,	 we	 should	 make	 no	 arbitrary	 choice	 of	 the	 way.	 There	 are
secret	forces	at	work,	leading	together	those	who	belong	together.	We	must	yield	to	this	attraction;	then
we	 make	 no	 mistakes.	 Where	 inner	 relationships	 exist,	 no	 great	 preparations	 and	 formalities	 are
necessary.	 People	 understand	 one	 another	 forthwith,	 just	 as	 the	 Divinity	 graciously	 accepts	 a	 small
offering	if	it	comes	from	the	heart.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Gathering	together	amid	sighs.
Nothing	that	would	further.
Going	is	without	blame.
Slight	humiliation.



Often	a	man	 feels	an	urge	 to	unite	with	others,	but	 the	 individuals	around	him	have	already	 formed
themselves	into	a	group,	so	that	he	remains	isolated.	The	whole	situation	proves	untenable.	Then	he	ought
to	choose	the	way	of	progress,	resolutely	allying	himself	with	a	man	who	stands	nearer	to	the	center	of
the	group,	and	can	help	him	to	gain	admission	to	the	closed	circle.	This	is	not	a	mistake,	even	though	at
first	his	position	as	an	outsider	is	somewhat	humiliating.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Great	good	fortune.	No	blame.

This	describes	a	man	who	gathers	people	around	him	in	the	name	of	his	ruler.	Since	he	is	not	striving
for	any	special	advantages	for	himself	but	is	working	unselfishly	to	bring	about	general	unity,	his	work	is
crowned	with	success,	and	everything	becomes	as	it	should	be.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
If	in	gathering	together	one	has	position,
This	brings	no	blame.
If	there	are	some	who	are	not	yet	sincerely	in	the	work,
Sublime	and	enduring	perseverance	is	needed.
Then	remorse	disappears.

When	people	spontaneously	gather	around	a	man,	it	is	only	a	good.	It	gives	him	a	certain	influence	that
can	be	altogether	useful.	But	of	course	there	is	also	the	possibility	that	many	may	gather	around	him	not
because	of	a	 feeling	of	confidence	but	merely	because	of	his	 influential	position.	This	 is	certainly	 to	be
regretted.	The	only	means	of	dealing	with	such	people	is	to	gain	their	confidence	through	steadfastness
and	intensified,	unswerving	devotion	to	duty.	In	this	way	secret	mistrust	will	gradually	be	overcome,	and
there	will	be	no	occasion	for	regret.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Lamenting	and	sighing,	floods	of	tears.
No	blame.

It	may	happen	 that	an	 individual	would	 like	 to	ally	himself	with	another,	but	his	good	 intentions	are
misunderstood.	Then	he	becomes	sad	and	laments.	But	this	is	the	right	course.	For	it	may	cause	the	other
person	to	come	to	his	senses,	so	that	the	alliance	that	has	been	sought	and	so	painfully	missed	is	after	all
achieved.



46.	Shêng	/	Pushing	Upward

The	lower	trigram,	Sun,	represents	wood,	and	the	upper,	K’un,	means	the	earth.	Linked	with	this	is	the
idea	 that	 wood	 in	 the	 earth	 grows	 upward.	 In	 contrast	 to	 the	meaning	 of	 Chin,	 PROGRESS	 (35),	 this
pushing	upward	 is	associated	with	effort,	 just	as	a	plant	needs	energy	 for	pushing	upward	 through	 the
earth.	That	 is	why	this	hexagram,	although	it	 is	connected	with	success,	 is	associated	with	effort	of	the
will.	In	PROGRESS	the	emphasis	is	on	expansion;	PUSHING	UPWARD	indicates	rather	a	vertical	ascent—
direct	rise	from	obscurity	and	lowliness	to	power	and	influence.

THE	JUDGMENT
PUSHING	UPWARD	has	supreme	success.
One	must	see	the	great	man.
Fear	not.
Departure	toward	the	south
Brings	good	fortune.

The	pushing	upward	of	the	good	elements	encounters	no	obstruction	and	is	therefore	accompanied	by
great	 success.	 The	 pushing	 upward	 is	made	 possible	 not	 by	 violence	 but	 by	modesty	 and	 adaptability.
Since	 the	 individual	 is	 borne	 along	by	 the	 propitiousness	 of	 the	 time,	 he	 advances.	He	must	 go	 to	 see
authoritative	 people.	He	need	not	 be	 afraid	 to	 do	 this,	 because	 success	 is	 assured.	But	 he	must	 set	 to
work,	for	activity	(this	is	the	meaning	of	“the	south”)	brings	good	fortune.

THE	IMAGE
Within	the	earth,	wood	grows:
The	image	of	PUSHING	UPWARD.
Thus	the	superior	man	of	devoted	character
Heaps	up	small	things
In	order	to	achieve	something	high	and	great.

Adapting	itself	to	obstacles	and	bending	around	them,	wood	in	the	earth	grows	upward	without	haste
and	without	rest.	Thus	too	the	superior	man	is	devoted	in	character	and	never	pauses	in	his	progress.

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Pushing	upward	that	meets	with	confidence
Brings	great	good	fortune.

This	is	the	situation	at	the	beginning	of	ascent.	Just	as	wood	draws	strength	for	its	upward	push	from
the	 root,	 which	 in	 itself	 is	 in	 the	 lowest	 place,	 so	 the	 power	 to	 rise	 comes	 from	 this	 low	 and	 obscure
station.	But	 there	 is	a	spiritual	affinity	with	 the	rulers	above,	and	 this	solidarity	creates	 the	confidence
needed	to	accomplish	something.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
If	one	is	sincere,
It	furthers	one	to	bring	even	a	small	offering.
No	blame.

Here	a	strong	man	is	presupposed.	It	is	true	that	he	does	not	fit	in	with	his	environment,	inasmuch	as
he	 is	 too	brusque	and	pays	too	 little	attention	to	 form.	But	as	he	 is	upright	 in	character,	he	meets	with
response,	and	his	lack	of	outward	form	does	no	harm.	Here	uprightness	is	the	outcome	of	sound	qualities
of	 character,	 whereas	 in	 the	 corresponding	 line	 of	 the	 preceding	 hexagram	 it	 is	 the	 result	 of	 innate
humility.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
One	pushes	upward	into	an	empty	city.

All	 obstructions	 that	generally	block	progress	 fall	 away	here.	Things	proceed	with	 remarkable	 ease.
Unhesitatingly	one	 follows	 this	 road,	 in	order	 to	profit	by	one’s	success.	Seen	 from	without,	everything
seems	to	be	in	the	best	of	order.	However,	no	promise	of	good	fortune	is	added.	It	is	a	question	how	long
such	unobstructed	success	can	last.	But	it	is	wise	not	to	yield	to	such	misgivings,	because	they	only	inhibit
one’s	power.	Instead,	the	point	is	to	profit	by	the	propitiousness	of	the	time.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	king	offers	him	Mount	Ch’i.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.

Mount	Ch’i	 is	 in	western	China,	the	homeland	of	King	Wên,	whose	son,	the	Duke	of	Chou,	added	the
words	 to	 the	 individual	 lines.	The	pronouncement	 takes	us	back	 to	a	 time	when	 the	Chou	dynasty	was
coming	 into	 power.	 At	 that	 time	 King	 Wên	 introduced	 his	 illustrious	 helpers	 to	 the	 god	 of	 his	 native
mountain,	 and	 they	 received	 their	 places	 in	 the	 halls	 of	 the	 ancestors	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 ruler.	 This
indicates	a	stage	 in	which	pushing	upward	attains	 its	goal.	One	acquires	 fame	 in	 the	sight	of	gods	and
men,	is	received	into	the	circle	of	those	who	foster	the	spiritual	life	of	the	nation,	and	thereby	attains	a
significance	that	endures	beyond	time.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
One	pushes	upward	by	steps.



When	 a	man	 is	 advancing	 farther	 and	 farther,	 it	 is	 important	 for	 him	 not	 to	 become	 intoxicated	 by
success.	Precisely	when	he	experiences	great	success	it	is	necessary	to	remain	sober	and	not	to	try	to	skip
any	 stages;	 he	must	 go	 on	 slowly,	 step	 by	 step,	 as	 though	 hesitant.	 Only	 such	 calm,	 steady	 progress,
overleaping	nothing,	leads	to	the	goal.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Pushing	upward	in	darkness.
It	furthers	one
To	be	unremittingly	persevering.

He	who	pushes	upward	blindly	deludes	himself.	He	knows	only	advance,	not	retreat.	But	 this	means
exhaustion.	 In	 such	a	case	 it	 is	 important	 to	be	constantly	mindful	 that	one	must	be	conscientious	and
consistent	and	must	remain	so.	Only	thus	does	one	become	free	of	blind	impulse,	which	is	always	harmful.



47.	K’un	/	Oppression	(Exhaustion)

The	 lake	 is	above,	water	below;	 the	 lake	 is	empty,	dried	up.1	Exhaustion	 is	expressed	 in	yet	another
way:	at	the	top,	a	dark	line	is	holding	down	two	light	lines;	below,	a	light	line	is	hemmed	in	between	two
dark	ones.	The	upper	trigram	belongs	to	the	principle	of	darkness,	the	lower	to	the	principle	of	light.	Thus
everywhere	superior	men	are	oppressed	and	held	in	restraint	by	inferior	men.

THE	JUDGMENT
OPPPRESSION.	Success.	Perseverance.
The	great	man	brings	about	good	fortune.
No	blame.
When	one	has	something	to	say,
It	is	not	believed.

Times	of	adversity	are	the	reverse	of	times	of	success,	but	they	can	lead	to	success	if	they	befall	the
right	man.	When	 a	 strong	man	meets	 with	 adversity,	 he	 remains	 cheerful	 despite	 all	 danger,	 and	 this
cheerfulness	is	the	source	of	later	successes;	it	is	that	stability	which	is	stronger	than	fate.	He	who	lets
his	spirit	be	broken	by	exhaustion	certainly	has	no	success.	But	if	adversity	only	bends	a	man,	it	creates	in
him	a	power	to	react	that	is	bound	in	time	to	manifest	itself.	No	inferior	man	is	capable	of	this.	Only	the
great	man	brings	about	good	 fortune	and	remains	blameless.	 It	 is	 true	 that	 for	 the	 time	being	outward
influence	is	denied	him,	because	his	words	have	no	effect.	Therefore	in	times	of	adversity	it	is	important
to	be	strong	within	and	sparing	of	words.

THE	IMAGE
There	is	no	water	in	the	lake:
The	image	of	EXHAUSTION.
Thus	the	superior	man	stakes	his	life
On	following	his	will.

When	the	water	has	flowed	out	below,	the	lake	must	dry	up	and	become	exhausted.	That	is	fate.	This
symbolizes	an	adverse	fate	in	human	life.	In	such	times	there	is	nothing	a	man	can	do	but	acquiesce	in	his
fate	and	remain	true	to	himself.	This	concerns	the	deepest	stratum	of	his	being,	for	this	alone	is	superior
to	all	external	fate.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
One	sits	oppressed	under	a	bare	tree
And	strays	into	a	gloomy	valley.
For	three	years	one	sees	nothing.

When	adversity	befalls	a	man,	it	is	important	above	all	things	for	him	to	be	strong	and	to	overcome	the
trouble	inwardly.	If	he	is	weak,	the	trouble	overwhelms	him.	Instead	of	proceeding	on	his	way,	he	remains
sitting	under	a	bare	tree	and	falls	ever	more	deeply	into	gloom	and	melancholy.	This	makes	the	situation
only	more	and	more	hopeless.	Such	an	attitude	comes	from	an	inner	delusion	that	he	must	by	all	means
overcome.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
One	is	oppressed	while	at	meat	and	drink.
The	man	with	the	scarlet	knee	bands	is	just	coming.
It	furthers	one	to	offer	sacrifice.
To	set	forth	brings	misfortune.
No	blame.

This	 pictures	 a	 state	 of	 inner	 oppression.	Externally,	 all	 is	well,	 one	has	meat	 and	drink.	But	 one	 is
exhausted	by	the	commonplaces	of	life,	and	there	seems	to	be	no	way	of	escape.	Then	help	comes	from	a
high	place.	A	prince—in	ancient	China	princes	wore	scarlet	knee	bands—is	in	search	of	able	helpers.	But
there	are	 still	 obstructions	 to	be	overcome.	Therefore	 it	 is	 important	 to	meet	 these	obstructions	 in	 the
invisible	realm	by	offerings	and	prayer.	To	set	forth	without	being	prepared	would	be	disastrous,	though
not	morally	wrong.	Here	a	disagreeable	situation	must	be	overcome	by	patience	of	spirit.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
A	man	permits	himself	to	be	oppressed	by	stone,
And	leans	on	thorns	and	thistles.
He	enters	his	house	and	does	not	see	his	wife.
Misfortune.

This	shows	a	man	who	is	restless	and	indecisive	in	times	of	adversity.	At	first	he	wants	to	push	ahead,
then	 he	 encounters	 obstructions	 that,	 it	 is	 true,	mean	 oppression	 only	 when	 recklessly	 dealt	 with.	 He
butts	his	head	against	a	wall	and	in	consequence	feels	himself	oppressed	by	the	wall.	Then	he	leans	on
things	 that	 have	 in	 themselves	 no	 stability	 and	 that	 are	merely	 a	 hazard	 for	 him	who	 leans	 on	 them.
Thereupon	he	turns	back	irresolutely	and	retires	into	his	house,	only	to	find,	as	a	fresh	disappointment,
that	his	wife	is	not	there.	Confucius	says	about	this	line:
“If	a	man	permits	himself	to	be	oppressed	by	something	that	ought	not	to	oppress	him,	his	name	will

certainly	 be	 disgraced.	 If	 he	 leans	 on	 things	 upon	 which	 one	 cannot	 lean,	 his	 life	 will	 certainly	 be



endangered.	For	him	who	is	in	disgrace	and	danger,	the	hour	of	death	draws	near;	how	can	he	then	still
see	his	wife?”

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	comes	very	quietly,	oppressed	in	a	golden	carriage.
Humiliation,	but	the	end	is	reached.

A	well-to-do	man	sees	the	need	of	the	lower	classes	and	would	like	very	much	to	be	of	help.	But	instead
of	 proceeding	with	 speed	 and	 energy	where	 there	 is	 need,	 he	 begins	 in	 a	 hesitant	 and	measured	way.
Then	he	encounters	obstructions.	Powerful	and	wealthy	acquaintances	draw	him	into	their	circle;	he	has
to	do	as	they	do	and	cannot	withdraw	from	them.	Hence	he	finds	himself	in	great	embarrassment.	But	the
trouble	is	transitory.	The	original	strength	of	his	nature	offsets	the	mistake	he	has	made,	and	the	goal	is
reached.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
His	nose	and	feet	are	cut	off.
Oppression	at	the	hands	of	the	man	with	the	purple	knee	bands.
Joy	comes	softly.
It	furthers	one	to	make	offerings	and	libations.

An	 individual	who	has	 the	good	of	mankind	at	heart	 is	oppressed	 from	above	and	below	 (this	 is	 the
meaning	of	the	cutting	off	of	nose	and	feet).	He	finds	no	help	among	the	people	whose	duty	it	would	be	to
aid	in	the	work	of	rescue	(ministers	wore	purple	knee	bands).	But	little	by	little,	things	take	a	turn	for	the
better.	Until	that	time,	he	should	turn	to	God,	firm	in	his	inner	composure,	and	pray	and	offer	sacrifice	for
the	general	well-being.

Six	at	the	top	means:
He	is	oppressed	by	creeping	vines.
He	moves	uncertainly	and	says,
“Movement	brings	remorse.”
If	one	feels	remorse	over	this	and	makes	a	start,
Good	fortune	comes.

A	man	is	oppressed	by	bonds	that	can	easily	be	broken.	The	distress	is	drawing	to	an	end.	But	he	is	still
irresolute;	he	is	still	influenced	by	the	previous	condition	and	fears	that	he	may	have	cause	for	regret	if	he
makes	a	move.	But	as	 soon	as	he	grasps	 the	 situation,	 changes	 this	mental	attitude,	and	makes	a	 firm
decision,	he	masters	the	oppression.



48.	Ching	/	The	Well

Wood	is	below,	water	above.	The	wood	goes	down	into	the	earth	to	bring	up	water.	The	image	derives
from	the	pole-and-bucket	well	of	ancient	China.	The	wood	represents	not	 the	buckets,	which	 in	ancient
times	were	made	of	clay,	but	rather	the	wooden	poles	by	which	the	water	is	hauled	up	from	the	well.	The
image	also	refers	to	the	world	of	plants,	which	lift	water	out	of	the	earth	by	means	of	their	fibers.

The	 well	 from	 which	 water	 is	 drawn	 conveys	 the	 further	 idea	 of	 an	 inexhaustible	 dispensing	 of
nourishment.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	WELL.	The	town	may	be	changed,
But	the	well	cannot	be	changed.
It	neither	decreases	nor	increases.
They	come	and	go	and	draw	from	the	well.
If	one	gets	down	almost	to	the	water
And	the	rope	does	not	go	all	the	way,
Or	the	jug	breaks,	it	brings	misfortune.

In	 ancient	 China	 the	 capital	 cities	 were	 sometimes	 moved,	 partly	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 more	 favorable
location,	 partly	 because	 of	 a	 change	 in	 dynasties.	 The	 style	 of	 architecture	 changed	 in	 the	 course	 of
centuries,	but	the	shape	of	the	well	has	remained	the	same	from	ancient	times	to	this	day.	Thus	the	well	is
the	 symbol	 of	 that	 social	 structure	which,	 evolved	 by	mankind	 in	meeting	 its	most	 primitive	 needs,	 is
independent	of	all	political	forms.	Political	structures	change,	as	do	nations,	but	the	life	of	man	with	its
needs	remains	eternally	the	same—this	cannot	be	changed.	Life	is	also	inexhaustible.	It	grows	neither	less
nor	more;	it	exists	for	one	and	for	all.	The	generations	come	and	go,	and	all	enjoy	life	in	its	inexhaustible
abundance.

However,	there	are	two	prerequisites	for	a	satisfactory	political	or	social	organization	of	mankind.	We
must	go	down	 to	 the	very	 foundations	of	 life.	For	any	merely	 superficial	 ordering	of	 life	 that	 leaves	 its
deepest	needs	unsatisfied	is	as	ineffectual	as	if	no	attempt	at	order	had	ever	been	made.	Carelessness—by
which	the	jug	is	broken—is	also	disastrous.	If	for	instance	the	military	defense	of	a	state	is	carried	to	such
excess	that	it	provokes	wars	by	which	the	power	of	the	state	is	annihilated,	this	is	a	breaking	of	the	jug.

This	hexagram	applies	also	to	the	individual.	However	men	may	differ	in	disposition	and	in	education,
the	 foundations	 of	 human	 nature	 are	 the	 same	 in	 everyone.	 And	 every	 human	 being	 can	 draw	 in	 the
course	of	his	education	from	the	inexhaustible	wellspring	of	the	divine	in	man’s	nature.	But	here	likewise
two	 dangers	 threaten:	 a	man	may	 fail	 in	 his	 education	 to	 penetrate	 to	 the	 real	 roots	 of	 humanity	 and
remain	fixed	in	convention—a	partial	education	of	this	sort	is	as	bad	as	none—or	he	may	suddenly	collapse
and	neglect	his	self-development.

THE	IMAGE
Water	over	wood:	the	image	of	THE	WELL.
Thus	the	superior	man	encourages	the	people	at	their	work,
And	exhorts	them	to	help	one	another.

The	trigram	Sun,	wood,	is	below,	and	the	trigram	K’an,	water,	is	above	it.	Wood	sucks	water	upward.
Just	 as	wood	 as	 an	 organism	 imitates	 the	 action	 of	 the	well,	 which	 benefits	 all	 parts	 of	 the	 plant,	 the
superior	man	organizes	human	society,	so	that,	as	in	a	plant	organism,	its	parts	co-operate	for	the	benefit
of	the	whole.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
One	does	not	drink	the	mud	of	the	well.
No	animals	come	to	an	old	well.

If	 a	man	wanders	 around	 in	 swampy	 lowlands,	 his	 life	 is	 submerged	 in	mud.	 Such	 a	man	 loses	 all
significance	for	mankind.	He	who	throws	himself	away	is	no	longer	sought	out	by	others.	In	the	end	no
one	troubles	about	him	any	more.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
At	the	wellhole	one	shoots	fishes.
The	jug	is	broken	and	leaks.

The	water	itself	is	clear,	but	it	is	not	being	used.	Thus	the	well	is	a	place	where	only	fish	will	stay,	and
whoever	comes	to	it,	comes	only	to	catch	fish.	But	the	jug	is	broken,	so	that	the	fish	cannot	be	kept	in	it.

This	 describes	 the	 situation	 of	 a	 person	 who	 possesses	 good	 qualities	 but	 neglects	 them.	 No	 one
bothers	about	him.	As	a	result	he	deteriorates	in	mind.	He	associates	with	inferior	men	and	can	no	longer
accomplish	anything	worthwhile.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	well	is	cleaned,	but	no	one	drinks	from	it.
This	is	my	heart’s	sorrow,
For	one	might	draw	from	it.
If	the	king	were	clear-minded,
Good	fortune	might	be	enjoyed	in	common.



An	able	man	is	available.	He	is	like	a	purified	well	whose	water	is	drinkable.	But	no	use	is	made	of	him.
This	is	the	sorrow	of	those	who	know	him.	One	wishes	that	the	prince	might	learn	about	it;	this	would	be
good	fortune	for	all	concerned.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	well	is	being	lined.	No	blame.

True,	if	a	well	is	being	lined	with	stone,	it	cannot	be	used	while	the	work	is	going	on.	But	the	work	is
not	 in	 vain;	 the	 result	 is	 that	 the	water	 stays	 clear.	 In	 life	 also	 there	 are	 times	when	 a	man	must	 put
himself	in	order.	During	such	a	time	he	can	do	nothing	for	others,	but	his	work	is	nonetheless	valuable,
because	by	enhancing	his	powers	and	abilities	through	inner	development,	he	can	accomplish	all	the	more
later	on.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
In	the	well	there	is	a	clear,	cold	spring
From	which	one	can	drink.

A	well	that	is	fed	by	a	spring	of	living	water	is	a	good	well.	A	man	who	has	virtues	like	a	well	of	this
sort	is	born	to	be	a	leader	and	savior	of	men,	for	he	has	the	water	of	life.	Nevertheless,	the	character	for
“good	fortune”	is	left	out	here.	The	all-important	thing	about	a	well	is	that	its	water	be	drawn.	The	best
water	is	only	a	potentiality	for	refreshment	as	long	as	it	is	not	brought	up.	So	too	with	leaders	of	mankind:
it	is	all-important	that	one	should	drink	from	the	spring	of	their	words	and	translate	them	into	life.

Six	at	the	top	means:
One	draws	from	the	well
Without	hindrance.
It	is	dependable.
Supreme	good	fortune.

The	well	is	there	for	all.	No	one	is	forbidden	to	take	water	from	it.	No	matter	how	many	come,	all	find
what	 they	need,	 for	 the	well	 is	 dependable.	 It	 has	 a	 spring	and	never	 runs	dry.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 a	 great
blessing	to	the	whole	land.	The	same	is	true	of	the	really	great	man,	whose	inner	wealth	is	inexhaustible;
the	more	that	people	draw	from	him,	the	greater	his	wealth	becomes.



49.	Ko	/	Revolution	(Molting)

The	Chinese	character	for	this	hexagram	means	in	its	original	sense	an	animal’s	pelt,	which	is	changed
in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 year	 by	molting.	 From	 this	 the	word	 is	 carried	 over	 to	 apply	 to	 the	 “moltings”	 in
political	life,	the	great	revolutions	connected	with	changes	of	governments.

The	two	trigrams	making	up	the	hexagram	are	the	same	two	that	appear	in	K’uei,	OPPOSITION	(38),
that	is,	the	two	younger	daughters,	Li	and	Tui.	But	while	there	the	elder	of	the	two	daughters	is	above,
and	what	results	is	essentially	only	an	opposition	of	tendencies,	here	the	younger	daughter	is	above.	The
influences	are	in	actual	conflict,	and	the	forces	combat	each	other	like	fire	and	water	(lake),	each	trying	to
destroy	the	other.	Hence	the	idea	of	revolution.

THE	JUDGMENT
REVOLUTION.	On	your	own	day
You	are	believed.
Supreme	success,
Furthering	through	perseverance.
Remorse	disappears.

Political	 revolutions	 are	 extremely	 grave	 matters.	 They	 should	 be	 undertaken	 only	 under	 stress	 of
direst	necessity,	when	there	is	no	other	way	out.	Not	everyone	is	called	to	this	task,	but	only	the	man	who
has	the	confidence	of	the	people,	and	even	he	only	when	the	time	is	ripe.	He	must	then	proceed	in	the
right	way,	so	that	he	gladdens	the	people	and,	by	enlightening	them,	prevents	excesses.	Furthermore,	he
must	be	quite	free	of	selfish	aims	and	must	really	relieve	the	need	of	the	people.	Only	then	does	he	have
nothing	to	regret.

Times	change,	and	with	them	their	demands.	Thus	the	seasons	change	in	the	course	of	the	year.	In	the
world	cycle	also	there	are	spring	and	autumn	in	the	life	of	peoples	and	nations,	and	these	call	for	social
transformations.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	in	the	lake:	the	image	of
REVOLUTION.
Thus	the	superior	man
Sets	the	calendar	in	order
And	makes	the	seasons	clear.

Fire	 below	 and	 the	 lake	 above	 combat	 and	 destroy	 each	 other.	 So	 too	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 year	 a
combat	takes	place	between	the	forces	of	light	and	the	forces	of	darkness,	eventuating	in	the	revolution	of
the	seasons.	Man	masters	these	changes	in	nature	by	noting	their	regularity	and	marking	off	the	passage
of	time	accordingly.	In	this	way	order	and	clarity	appear	in	the	apparently	chaotic	changes	of	the	seasons,
and	man	is	able	to	adjust	himself	in	advance	to	the	demands	of	the	different	times.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Wrapped	in	the	hide	of	a	yellow	cow.

Changes	 ought	 to	 be	 undertaken	 only	when	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 to	 be	 done.	 Therefore	 at	 first	 the
utmost	restraint	is	necessary.	One	must	become	firm	in	one’s	mind,	control	oneself—yellow	is	the	color	of
the	mean,	 and	 the	 cow	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 docility—and	 refrain	 from	 doing	 anything	 for	 the	 time	 being,
because	any	premature	offensive	will	bring	evil	results.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
When	one’s	own	day	comes,	one	may	create	revolution.
Starting	brings	good	fortune.
No	blame.

When	we	 have	 tried	 in	 every	way	 to	 bring	 about	 reforms,	 but	without	 success,	 revolution	 becomes
necessary.	But	such	a	thoroughgoing	upheaval	must	be	carefully	prepared.	There	must	be	available	a	man
who	has	the	requisite	abilities	and	who	possesses	public	confidence.	To	such	a	man	we	may	well	turn.	This
brings	good	fortune	and	is	not	a	mistake.	The	first	thing	to	be	considered	is	our	inner	attitude	toward	the
new	condition	that	will	inevitably	come.	We	have	to	go	out	to	meet	it,	as	it	were.	Only	in	this	way	can	it	be
prepared	for.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Starting	brings	misfortune.
Perseverance	brings	danger.
When	talk	of	revolution	has	gone	the	rounds	three	times,
One	may	commit	himself,
And	men	will	believe	him.

When	 change	 is	 necessary,	 there	 are	 two	 mistakes	 to	 be	 avoided.	 One	 lies	 in	 excessive	 haste	 and
ruthlessness,	which	bring	disaster.	The	other	lies	in	excessive	hesitation	and	conservatism,	which	are	also
dangerous.	 Not	 every	 demand	 for	 change	 in	 the	 existing	 order	 should	 be	 heeded.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,
repeated	and	well-founded	complaints	should	not	fail	of	a	hearing.	When	talk	of	change	has	come	to	one’s
ears	three	times,	and	has	been	pondered	well,	he	may	believe	and	acquiesce	in	it.	Then	he	will	meet	with



belief	and	will	accomplish	something.1
Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Remorse	disappears.	Men	believe	him.
Changing	the	form	of	government	brings	good	fortune.

Radical	 changes	 require	 adequate	 authority.	 A	man	must	 have	 inner	 strength	 as	 well	 as	 influential
position.	What	he	does	must	correspond	with	a	higher	truth	and	must	not	spring	from	arbitrary	or	petty
motives;	then	it	brings	great	good	fortune.	If	a	revolution	is	not	founded	on	such	inner	truth,	the	results
are	bad,	and	it	has	no	success.	For	in	the	end	men	will	support	only	those	undertakings	which	they	feel
instinctively	to	be	just.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	great	man	changes	like	a	tiger.
Even	before	he	questions	the	oracle
He	is	believed.

A	tigerskin,	with	its	highly	visible	black	stripes	on	a	yellow	ground,	shows	its	distinct	pattern	from	afar.
It	is	the	same	with	a	revolution	brought	about	by	a	great	man:	large,	clear	guiding	lines	become	visible,
understandable	to	everyone.	Therefore	he	need	not	first	consult	the	oracle,	for	he	wins	the	spontaneous
support	of	the	people.

Six	at	the	top	means:
The	superior	man	changes	like	a	panther.
The	inferior	man	molts	in	the	face.
Starting	brings	misfortune.
To	remain	persevering	brings	good	fortune.

After	the	large	and	fundamental	problems	are	settled,	certain	minor	reforms,	and	elaborations	of	these,
are	necessary.	These	detailed	reforms	may	be	likened	to	the	equally	distinct	but	relatively	small	marks	of
the	panther’s	coat.	As	a	consequence,	a	change	also	takes	place	among	the	inferior	people.	In	conformity
with	the	new	order,	they	likewise	“molt.”	This	molting,	it	is	true,	does	not	go	very	deep,	but	that	is	not	to
be	expected.	We	must	be	satisfied	with	the	attainable.	If	we	should	go	too	far	and	try	to	achieve	too	much,
it	would	lead	to	unrest	and	misfortune.	For	the	object	of	a	great	revolution	is	the	attainment	of	clarified,
secure	conditions	ensuring	a	general	stabilization	on	the	basis	of	what	is	possible	at	the	moment.



50.	Ting	/	The	Caldron

The	six	lines	construct	the	image	of	Ting,	THE	CALDRON;	at	the	bottom	are	the	legs,	over	them	the
belly,	 then	 come	 the	 ears	 (handles),	 and	 at	 the	 top	 the	 carrying	 rings.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 image
suggests	the	idea	of	nourishment.	The	ting,	cast	of	bronze,	was	the	vessel	that	held	the	cooked	viands	in
the	temple	of	the	ancestors	and	at	banquets.	The	head	of	the	family	served	the	food	from	the	ting	into	the
bowls	of	the	guests.1

THE	WELL	(48)	likewise	has	the	secondary	meaning	of	giving	nourishment,	but	rather	more	in	relation
to	 the	 people.	 The	 ting,	 as	 a	 utensil	 pertaining	 to	 a	 refined	 civilization,	 suggests	 the	 fostering	 and
nourishing	of	able	men,	which	redounded	to	the	benefit	of	the	state.2

This	hexagram	and	THE	WELL	are	the	only	two	in	the	Book	of	Changes	that	represent	concrete,	man-
made	objects.	Yet	here	too	the	thought	has	its	abstract	connotation.

Sun,	below,	 is	wood	and	wind;	Li,	above,	 is	 flame.	Thus	together	they	stand	for	the	flame	kindled	by
wood	and	wind,	which	likewise	suggests	the	idea	of	preparing	food.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CALDRON.	Supreme	good	fortune.
Success.

While	THE	WELL	relates	to	the	social	foundation	of	our	life,	and	this	foundation	is	likened	to	the	water
that	 serves	 to	 nourish	 growing	 wood,	 the	 present	 hexagram	 refers	 to	 the	 cultural	 superstructure	 of
society.	Here	 it	 is	 the	wood	that	serves	as	nourishment	 for	 the	 flame,	 the	spirit.	All	 that	 is	visible	must
grow	beyond	 itself,	extend	 into	 the	realm	of	 the	 invisible.	Thereby	 it	 receives	 its	 true	consecration	and
clarity	and	takes	firm	root	in	the	cosmic	order.

Here	we	see	civilization	as	it	reaches	its	culmination	in	religion.	The	ting	serves	in	offering	sacrifice	to
God.	The	highest	earthly	values	must	be	sacrificed	to	the	divine.	But	the	truly	divine	does	not	manifest
itself	apart	from	man.	The	supreme	revelation	of	God	appears	in	prophets	and	holy	men.	To	venerate	them
is	true	veneration	of	God.	The	will	of	God,	as	revealed	through	them,	should	be	accepted	in	humility;	this
brings	inner	enlightenment	and	true	understanding	of	the	world,	and	this	leads	to	great	good	fortune	and
success.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	over	wood:
The	image	of	THE	CALDRON.
Thus	the	superior	man	consolidates	his	fate
By	making	his	position	correct.

The	fate	of	fire	depends	on	wood;	as	long	as	there	is	wood	below,	the	fire	bums	above.	It	is	the	same	in
human	life;	there	is	in	man	likewise	a	fate	that	lends	power	to	his	life.	And	if	he	succeeds	in	assigning	the
right	place	to	life	and	to	fate,	thus	bringing	the	two	into	harmony,	he	puts	his	fate	on	a	firm	footing.	These
words	contain	hints	about	 the	 fostering	of	 life	as	handed	on	by	oral	 tradition	 in	 the	secret	 teachings	of
Chinese	yoga.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
A	ting	with	legs	upturned.
Furthers	removal	of	stagnating	stuff.
One	takes	a	concubine	for	the	sake	of	her	son.
No	blame.

If	a	ting	 is	turned	upside	down	before	being	used,	no	harm	is	done—on	the	contrary,	this	clears	it	of
refuse.	A	concubine’s	position	is	lowly,	but	because	she	has	a	son	she	comes	to	be	honored.

These	two	metaphors	express	the	idea	that	in	a	highly	developed	civilization,	such	as	that	indicated	by
this	hexagram,	every	person	of	good	will	can	in	some	way	or	other	succeed.	No	matter	how	lowly	he	may
be,	 provided	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 purify	 himself,	 he	 is	 accepted.	He	 attains	 a	 station	 in	which	 he	 can	 prove
himself	fruitful	in	accomplishment,	and	as	a	result	he	gains	recognition.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
There	is	food	in	the	ting.
My	comrades	are	envious,
But	they	cannot	harm	me.
Good	fortune.

In	 a	period	of	 advanced	 culture,	 it	 is	 of	 the	greatest	 importance	 that	 one	 should	 achieve	 something
significant.	If	a	man	concentrates	on	such	real	undertakings,	he	may	indeed	experience	envy	and	disfavor,
but	that	is	not	dangerous.	The	more	he	limits	himself	to	his	actual	achievements,	the	less	harm	can	the
envious	inflict	on	him.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	handle	of	the	ting	is	altered.
One	is	impeded	in	his	way	of	life.
The	fat	of	the	pheasant	is	not	eaten.
Once	rain	falls,	remorse	is	spent.



Good	fortune	comes	in	the	end.
The	handle	is	the	means	for	lifting	up	the	ting.	If	the	handle	is	altered,	the	ting	cannot	be	lifted	up	and

used,	and,	sad	to	say,	the	delicious	food	in	it,	such	as	pheasant	fat,	cannot	be	eaten	by	anyone.
This	describes	a	man	who,	in	a	highly	evolved	civilization,	finds	himself	in	a	place	where	no	one	notices

or	recognizes	him.	This	 is	a	severe	block	to	his	effectiveness.	All	of	his	good	qualities	and	gifts	of	mind
thus	needlessly	go	to	waste.	But	if	he	will	only	see	to	it	that	he	is	possessed	of	something	truly	spiritual,
the	time	is	bound	to	come,	sooner	or	later,	when	the	difficulties	will	be	resolved	and	all	will	go	well.	The
fall	of	rain	symbolizes	here,	as	in	other	instances,	release	of	tension.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	legs	of	the	ting	are	broken.
The	prince’s	meal	is	spilled
And	his	person	is	soiled.
Misfortune.

A	man	has	a	difficult	and	responsible	task	to	which	he	is	not	adequate.	Moreover,	he	does	not	devote
himself	to	it	with	all	his	strength	but	goes	about	with	inferior	people;	therefore	the	execution	of	the	work
fails.	In	this	way	he	also	incurs	personal	opprobrium.

Confucius	says	about	this	line:	“Weak	character	coupled	with	honored	place,	meager	knowledge	with
large	plans,	limited	powers	with	heavy	responsibility,	will	seldom	escape	disaster.”

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	ting	has	yellow	handles,	golden	carrying	rings.
Perseverance	furthers.

Here	we	have,	in	a	ruling	position,	a	man	who	is	approachable	and	modest	in	nature.	As	a	result	of	this
attitude	he	succeeds	in	finding	strong	and	able	helpers	who	complement	and	aid	him	in	his	work.	Having
achieved	this	attitude,	which	requires	constant	self-abnegation,	it	is	important	for	him	to	hold	to	it	and	not
to	let	himself	be	led	astray.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	ting	has	rings	of	jade.
Great	good	fortune.
Nothing	that	would	not	act	to	further.

In	the	preceding	line	the	carrying	rings	are	described	as	golden,	to	denote	their	strength;	here	they	are
said	to	be	of	jade.	Jade	is	notable	for	its	combination	of	hardness	with	soft	luster.	This	counsel,	in	relation
to	the	man	who	is	open	to	it,	works	greatly	to	his	advantage.	Here	the	counsel	is	described	in	relation	to
the	sage	who	imparts	it.	In	imparting	it,	he	will	be	mild	and	pure,	like	precious	jade.	Thus	the	work	finds
favor	in	the	eyes	of	the	Deity,	who	dispenses	great	good	fortune,	and	becomes	pleasing	to	men,	wherefore
all	goes	well.



51.	Chên	/	The	Arousing	(Shock,	Thunder)

The	 hexagram	Chên	 represents	 the	 eldest	 son,	who	 seizes	 rule	with	 energy	 and	 power.	 A	 yang	 line
develops	 below	 two	 yin	 lines	 and	 presses	 upward	 forcibly.	 This	movement	 is	 so	 violent	 that	 it	 arouses
terror.	 It	 is	 symbolized	by	 thunder,	which	bursts	 forth	 from	 the	earth	and	by	 its	 shock	causes	 fear	and
trembling.

THE	JUDGMENT
SHOCK	brings	success.
Shock	comes—oh,	oh!
Laughing	words—ha,	ha!
The	shock	terrifies	for	a	hundred	miles,
And	he	does	not	let	fall	the	sacrificial	spoon	and	chalice.

The	shock	that	comes	from	the	manifestation	of	God	within	the	depths	of	the	earth	makes	man	afraid,
but	this	fear	of	God	is	good,	for	joy	and	merriment	can	follow	upon	it.

When	a	man	has	learned	within	his	heart	what	fear	and	trembling	mean,	he	is	safeguarded	against	any
terror	produced	by	outside	influences.	Let	the	thunder	roll	and	spread	terror	a	hundred	miles	around:	he
remains	so	composed	and	reverent	in	spirit	that	the	sacrificial	rite	is	not	interrupted.	This	is	the	spirit	that
must	animate	leaders	and	rulers	of	men—a	profound	inner	seriousness	from	which	all	outer	terrors	glance
off	harmlessly.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	repeated:	the	image	of	SHOCK.
Thus	in	fear	and	trembling
The	superior	man	sets	his	life	in	order
And	examines	himself.

The	 shock	 of	 continuing	 thunder	 brings	 fear	 and	 trembling.	 The	 superior	man	 is	 always	 filled	 with
reverence	at	the	manifestation	of	God;	he	sets	his	life	in	order	and	searches	his	heart,	lest	it	harbor	any
secret	opposition	to	the	will	of	God.	Thus	reverence	is	the	foundation	of	true	culture.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Shock	comes—oh,	oh!
Then	follow	laughing	words—ha,	ha!
Good	fortune.

The	fear	and	trembling	engendered	by	shock	come	to	an	individual	at	first	in	such	a	way	that	he	sees
himself	placed	at	a	disadvantage	as	against	others.	But	this	is	only	transitory.	When	the	ordeal	is	over,	he
experiences	relief,	and	thus	the	very	terror	he	had	to	endure	at	the	outset	brings	good	fortune	in	the	long
run.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Shock	comes	bringing	danger.
A	hundred	thousand	times
You	lose	your	treasures
And	must	climb	the	nine	hills.
Do	not	go	in	pursuit	of	them.
After	seven	days	you	will	get	them	back	again.

This	 pictures	 a	 situation	 in	which	 a	 shock	 endangers	 a	man	 and	he	 suffers	 great	 losses.	Resistance
would	 be	 contrary	 to	 the	 movement	 of	 the	 time	 and	 for	 this	 reason	 unsuccessful.	 Therefore	 he	 must
simply	 retreat	 to	 heights	 inaccessible	 to	 the	 threatening	 forces	 of	 danger.	 He	must	 accept	 his	 loss	 of
property	without	worrying	too	much	about	it.	When	the	time	of	shock	and	upheaval	that	has	robbed	him
of	his	possessions	has	passed,	he	will	get	them	back	again	without	going	in	pursuit	of	them.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Shock	comes	and	makes	one	distraught.
If	shock	spurs	to	action
One	remains	free	of	misfortune.

There	are	three	kinds	of	shock—the	shock	of	heaven,	which	is	thunder,	the	shock	of	fate,	and,	finally,
the	shock	of	the	heart.	The	present	hexagram	refers	less	to	inner	shock	than	to	the	shock	of	fate.	In	such
times	of	shock,	presence	of	mind	is	all	too	easily	lost:	the	individual	overlooks	all	opportunities	for	action
and	mutely	 lets	 fate	 take	 its	 course.	But	 if	he	allows	 the	 shocks	of	 fate	 to	 induce	movement	within	his
mind,	he	will	overcome	these	external	blows	with	little	effort.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Shock	is	mired.

Movement	 within	 the	 mind	 depends	 for	 its	 success	 partly	 on	 circumstances.	 If	 there	 is	 neither	 a
resistance	 that	 might	 be	 vigorously	 combated,	 nor	 yet	 a	 yielding	 that	 permits	 of	 victory—if,	 instead,
everything	is	tough	and	inert	like	mire—movement	is	crippled.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Shock	goes	hither	and	thither.



Danger.
However,	nothing	at	all	is	lost.
Yet	there	are	things	to	be	done.

This	 is	 a	 case	 not	 of	 a	 single	 shock	 but	 of	 repeated	 shocks	 with	 no	 breathing	 space	 between.
Nonetheless,	the	shock	causes	no	loss,	because	one	takes	care	to	stay	in	the	center	of	movement	and	in
this	way	to	be	spared	the	fate	of	being	helplessly	tossed	hither	and	thither.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Shock	brings	ruin	and	terrified	gazing	around.
Going	ahead	brings	misfortune.
If	it	has	not	yet	touched	one’s	own	body
But	has	reached	one’s	neighbor	first,
There	is	no	blame.
One’s	comrades	have	something	to	talk	about.

When	 inner	shock	 is	at	 its	height,	 it	robs	a	man	of	reflection	and	clarity	of	vision.	 In	such	a	state	of
shock	 it	 is	of	course	 impossible	 to	act	with	presence	of	mind.	Then	 the	right	 thing	 is	 to	keep	still	until
composure	and	clarity	are	restored.	But	this	a	man	can	do	only	when	he	himself	is	not	yet	infected	by	the
agitation,	although	its	disastrous	effects	are	already	visible	in	those	around	him.	If	he	withdraws	from	the
affair	in	time,	he	remains	free	of	mistakes	and	injury.	But	his	comrades,	who	no	longer	heed	any	warning,
will	in	their	excitement	certainly	be	displeased	with	him.	However,	he	must	not	take	this	into	account.



52.	Kên	/	Keeping	Still,	Mountain

The	image	of	this	hexagram	is	the	mountain,	the	youngest	son	of	heaven	and	earth.	The	male	principle
is	at	the	top,	because	it	strives	upward	by	nature;	the	female	principle	is	below,	since	the	direction	of	its
movement	is	downward.	Thus	there	is	rest	because	the	movement	has	come	to	its	normal	end.

In	its	application	to	man,	the	hexagram	turns	upon	the	problem	of	achieving	a	quiet	heart.	It	 is	very
difficult	 to	 bring	 quiet	 to	 the	 heart.	 While	 Buddhism	 strives	 for	 rest	 through	 an	 ebbing	 away	 of	 all
movement	in	nirvana,	the	Book	of	Changes	holds	that	rest	is	merely	a	state	of	polarity	that	always	posits
movement	as	its	complement.	Possibly	the	words	of	the	text	embody	directions	for	the	practice	of	yoga.

THE	JUDGMENT
KEEPING	STILL.	Keeping	his	back	still
So	that	he	no	longer	feels	his	body.
He	goes	into	his	courtyard
And	does	not	see	his	people.
No	blame.

True	quiet	means	keeping	still	when	the	time	has	come	to	keep	still,	and	going	forward	when	the	time
has	come	to	go	forward.	In	this	way	rest	and	movement	are	in	agreement	with	the	demands	of	the	time,
and	thus	there	is	light	in	life.

The	hexagram	signifies	the	end	and	the	beginning	of	all	movement.	The	back	is	named	because	in	the
back	are	 located	all	 the	nerve	fibers	that	mediate	movement.	 If	 the	movement	of	 these	spinal	nerves	 is
brought	to	a	standstill,	the	ego,	with	its	restlessness,	disappears	as	it	were.	When	a	man	has	thus	become
calm,	 he	may	 turn	 to	 the	 outside	world.	He	 no	 longer	 sees	 in	 it	 the	 struggle	 and	 tumult	 of	 individual
beings,	and	therefore	he	has	that	true	peace	of	mind	which	is	needed	for	understanding	the	great	laws	of
the	 universe	 and	 for	 acting	 in	 harmony	 with	 them.	 Whoever	 acts	 from	 these	 deep	 levels	 makes	 no
mistakes.

THE	IMAGE
Mountains	standing	close	together:
The	image	of	KEEPING	STILL.
Thus	the	superior	man
Does	not	permit	his	thoughts
To	go	beyond	his	situation.

The	heart	thinks	constantly.	This	cannot	be	changed,	but	the	movements	of	the	heart—that	is,	a	man’s
thoughts—should	restrict	themselves	to	the	 immediate	situation.	All	 thinking	that	goes	beyond	this	only
makes	the	heart	sore.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
Keeping	his	toes	still.
No	blame.
Continued	perseverance	furthers.

Keeping	the	toes	still	means	halting	before	one	has	even	begun	to	move.	The	beginning	is	the	time	of
few	mistakes.	At	that	time	one	is	still	in	harmony	with	primal	innocence.	Not	yet	influenced	by	obscuring
interests	and	desires,	one	sees	things	intuitively	as	they	really	are.	A	man	who	halts	at	the	beginning,	so
long	as	he	has	not	yet	abandoned	truth,	finds	the	right	way.	But	persisting	firmness	is	needed	to	keep	one
from	drifting	irresolutely.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
Keeping	his	calves	still.
He	cannot	rescue	him	whom	he	follows.
His	heart	is	not	glad.

The	 leg	 cannot	 move	 independently;	 it	 depends	 on	 the	movement	 of	 the	 body.	 If	 a	 leg	 is	 suddenly
stopped	while	the	whole	body	is	in	vigorous	motion,	the	continuing	body	movement	will	make	one	fall.

The	same	 is	 true	of	a	man	who	serves	a	master	 stronger	 than	himself.	He	 is	 swept	along,	and	even
though	he	may	himself	halt	on	the	path	of	wrongdoing,	he	can	no	longer	check	the	other	in	his	powerful
movement.	Where	 the	master	 presses	 forward,	 the	 servant,	 no	matter	 how	good	his	 intentions,	 cannot
save	him.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Keeping	his	hips	still.
Making	his	sacrum	stiff.
Dangerous.	The	heart	suffocates.

This	refers	to	enforced	quiet.	The	restless	heart	is	to	be	subdued	by	forcible	means.	But	fire	when	it	is
smothered	changes	into	acrid	smoke	that	suffocates	as	it	spreads.

Therefore,	in	exercises	in	meditation	and	concentration,	one	ought	not	to	try	to	force	results.	Rather,
calmness	must	 develop	naturally	 out	 of	 a	 state	 of	 inner	 composure.	 If	 one	 tries	 to	 induce	 calmness	 by
means	of	artificial	rigidity,	meditation	will	lead	to	very	unwholesome	results.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:



Keeping	his	trunk	still.
No	blame.

As	 has	 been	 pointed	 out	 above	 in	 the	 comment	 on	 the	 Judgment,	 keeping	 the	 back	 at	 rest	 means
forgetting	 the	 ego.	 This	 is	 the	 highest	 stage	 of	 rest.	 Here	 this	 stage	 has	 not	 yet	 been	 reached:	 the
individual	in	this	instance,	though	able	to	keep	the	ego,	with	its	thoughts	and	impulses,	in	a	state	of	rest,
is	 not	 yet	 quite	 liberated	 from	 its	 dominance.	 Nonetheless,	 keeping	 the	 heart	 at	 rest	 is	 an	 important
function,	leading	in	the	end	to	the	complete	elimination	of	egotistic	drives.	Even	though	at	this	point	one
does	not	yet	remain	free	from	all	the	dangers	of	doubt	and	unrest,	this	frame	of	mind	is	not	a	mistake,	as
it	leads	ultimately	to	that	other,	higher	level.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Keeping	his	jaws	still.
The	words	have	order.
Remorse	disappears.

A	man	in	a	dangerous	situation,	especially	when	he	is	not	adequate	to	it,	is	inclined	to	be	very	free	with
talk	 and	 presumptuous	 jokes.	 But	 injudicious	 speech	 easily	 leads	 to	 situations	 that	 subsequently	 give
much	cause	for	regret.	However,	if	a	man	is	reserved	in	speech,	his	words	take	ever	more	definite	form,
and	every	occasion	for	regret	vanishes.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Noblehearted	keeping	still.
Good	fortune.

This	marks	the	consummation	of	the	effort	to	attain	tranquility.	One	is	at	rest,	not	merely	in	a	small,
circumscribed	way	in	regard	to	matters	of	detail,	but	one	has	also	a	general	resignation	in	regard	to	life
as	a	whole,	and	this	confers	peace	and	good	fortune	in	relation	to	every	individual	matter.



53.	Chien	/	Development	(Gradual	Progress)

This	hexagram	is	made	up	of	Sun	(wood,	penetration)	above,	i.e.,	without,	and	Kên	(mountain,	stillness)
below,	 i.e.,	 within.	 A	 tree	 on	 a	 mountain	 develops	 slowly	 according	 to	 the	 law	 of	 its	 being	 and
consequently	stands	firmly	rooted.	This	gives	the	idea	of	a	development	that	proceeds	gradually,	step	by
step.	 The	 attributes	 of	 the	 trigrams	 also	 point	 to	 this:	 within	 is	 tranquility,	 which	 guards	 against
precipitate	actions,	and	without	is	penetration,	which	makes	development	and	progress	possible.

THE	JUDGMENT
DEVELOPMENT.	The	maiden
Is	given	in	marriage.
Good	fortune.
Perseverance	furthers.

The	 development	 of	 events	 that	 leads	 to	 a	 girl’s	 following	 a	man	 to	 his	 home	 proceeds	 slowly.	 The
various	 formalities	 must	 be	 disposed	 of	 before	 the	 marriage	 takes	 place.	 This	 principle	 of	 gradual
development	 can	 be	 applied	 to	 other	 situations	 as	well;	 it	 is	 always	 applicable	where	 it	 is	 a	matter	 of
correct	relationships	of	co-operation,	as	 for	 instance	 in	the	appointment	of	an	official.	The	development
must	be	allowed	to	take	its	proper	course.	Hasty	action	would	not	be	wise.	This	is	also	true,	finally,	of	any
effort	 to	 exert	 influence	 on	 others,	 for	 here	 too	 the	 essential	 factor	 is	 a	 correct	 way	 of	 development
through	cultivation	of	one’s	own	personality.	No	influence	such	as	that	exerted	by	agitators	has	a	lasting
effect.

Within	 the	 personality	 too,	 development	 must	 follow	 the	 same	 course	 if	 lasting	 results	 are	 to	 be
achieved.	Gentleness	 that	 is	adaptable,	but	at	 the	same	time	penetrating,	 is	 the	outer	 form	that	should
proceed	from	inner	calm.

The	very	gradualness	of	the	development	makes	it	necessary	to	have	perseverance,	for	perseverance
alone	prevents	slow	progress	from	dwindling	to	nothing.

THE	IMAGE
On	the	mountain,	a	tree:
The	image	of	DEVELOPMENT.
Thus	the	superior	man	abides	in	dignity	and	virtue,
In	order	to	improve	the	mores.

The	 tree	 on	 the	mountain	 is	 visible	 from	 afar,	 and	 its	 development	 influences	 the	 landscape	 of	 the
entire	region.	It	does	not	shoot	up	like	a	swamp	plant;	its	growth	proceeds	gradually.	Thus	also	the	work
of	influencing	people	can	be	only	gradual.	No	sudden	influence	or	awakening	is	of	lasting	effect.	Progress
must	 be	quite	gradual,	 and	 in	 order	 to	 obtain	 such	progress	 in	 public	 opinion	 and	 in	 the	mores	 of	 the
people,	 it	 is	 necessary	 for	 the	 personality	 to	 acquire	 influence	 and	 weight.	 This	 comes	 about	 through
careful	and	constant	work	on	one’s	own	moral	development.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	shore.
The	young	son	is	in	danger.
There	is	talk.	No	blame.

All	the	individual	lines	in	this	hexagram	symbolize	the	gradual	flight	of	the	wild	goose.	The	wild	goose
is	the	symbol	of	conjugal	fidelity,	because	it	is	believed	that	this	bird	never	takes	another	mate	after	the
death	of	the	first.

The	initial	line	suggests	the	first	resting	place	in	the	flight	of	water	birds	from	the	water	to	the	heights.
The	shore	is	reached.	The	situation	is	that	of	a	lonely	young	man	who	is	just	starting	out	to	make	his	way
in	 life.	Since	no	one	 comes	 to	help	him,	his	 first	 steps	 are	 slow	and	hesitant,	 and	he	 is	 surrounded	by
danger.	Naturally	he	 is	subjected	to	much	criticism.	But	these	very	difficulties	keep	him	from	being	too
hasty,	and	his	progress	is	successful.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	cliff.
Eating	and	drinking	in	peace	and	concord.
Good	fortune.

The	cliff	 is	a	safe	place	on	shore.	The	development	has	gone	a	step	further.	The	initial	insecurity	has
been	overcome,	and	a	safe	position	in	life	has	been	found,	giving	one	enough	to	live	on.	This	first	success,
opening	 up	 a	 path	 to	 activity,	 brings	 a	 certain	 joyousness	 of	 mood,	 and	 one	 goes	 to	 meet	 the	 future
reassured.

It	 is	 said	of	 the	wild	goose	 that	 it	 calls	 to	 its	comrades	whenever	 it	 finds	 food;	 this	 is	 the	symbol	of
peace	and	concord	 in	good	 fortune.	A	man	does	not	want	 to	keep	his	good	 luck	 for	himself	only,	but	 is
ready	to	share	it	with	others.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	plateau.
The	man	goes	forth	and	does	not	return.
The	woman	carries	a	child	but	does	not	bring	it	forth.



Misfortune.
It	furthers	one	to	fight	off	robbers.

The	high	plateau	is	dry	and	unsuitable	for	the	wild	goose.	If	it	goes	there,	it	has	lost	its	way	and	gone
too	far.	This	is	contrary	to	the	law	of	development.

It	is	the	same	in	human	life.	If	we	do	not	let	things	develop	quietly	but	plunge	of	our	own	choice	too
rashly	into	a	struggle,	misfortune	results.	A	man	jeopardizes	his	own	life,	and	his	family	perishes	thereby.
However,	this	is	not	at	all	necessary;	it	is	only	the	result	of	transgressing	the	law	of	natural	development.
If	one	does	not	willfully	provoke	a	conflict,	but	confines	himself	to	vigorously	maintaining	his	own	position
and	to	warding	off	unjustified	attacks,	all	goes	well.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	tree.
Perhaps	it	will	find	a	flat	branch.	No	blame.

A	tree	is	not	a	suitable	place	for	a	wild	goose.	But	if	it	is	clever,	it	will	find	a	flat	branch	on	which	it	can
get	 a	 footing.	 A	 man’s	 life	 too,	 in	 the	 course	 of	 its	 development,	 often	 brings	 him	 into	 inappropriate
situations,	in	which	he	finds	it	difficult	to	hold	his	own	without	danger.	Then	it	is	important	to	be	sensible
and	 yielding.	 This	 enables	 him	 to	 discover	 a	 safe	 place	 in	 which	 life	 can	 go	 on,	 although	 he	 may	 be
surrounded	by	danger.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	summit.
For	three	years	the	woman	has	no	child.
In	the	end	nothing	can	hinder	her.
Good	fortune.

The	summit	 is	a	high	place.	 In	a	high	position	one	easily	becomes	 isolated.	One	 is	misjudged	by	 the
very	person	on	whom	one	is	dependent—the	woman	by	her	husband,	the	official	by	his	superior.	This	is
the	 work	 of	 deceitful	 persons	 who	 have	 wormed	 their	 way	 in.	 The	 result	 is	 that	 relationships	 remain
sterile,	and	nothing	 is	accomplished.	But	 in	the	course	of	 further	development,	such	misunderstandings
are	cleared	away,	and	reconciliation	is	achieved	after	all.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	cloud	heights.
Its	feathers	can	be	used	for	the	sacred	dance.
Good	fortune.

Here	life	comes	to	its	end.	A	man’s	work	stands	completed.	The	path	rises	high	toward	heaven,	like	the
flight	of	wild	geese	when	they	have	left	the	earth	far	behind.	There	they	fly,	keeping	to	the	order	of	their
flight	 in	 strict	 formation.	 And	 if	 their	 feathers	 fall,	 they	 can	 serve	 as	 ornaments	 in	 the	 sacred	 dance
pantomimes	performed	in	the	temples.	Thus	the	life	of	a	man	who	has	perfected	himself	is	a	bright	light
for	the	people	of	the	earth,	who	look	up	to	him	as	an	example.



54.	Kuei	Mei	/	The	Marrying	Maiden

Above	we	have	Chên,	the	eldest	son,	and	below,	Tui,	the	youngest	daughter.	The	man	leads	and	the	girl
follows	him	 in	gladness.	The	picture	 is	 that	of	 the	entrance	of	 the	girl	 into	her	husband’s	house.	 In	all,
there	are	four	hexagrams	depicting	the	relationship	between	husband	and	wife.	Hsien,	INFLUENCE	(31),
describes	 the	 attraction	 that	 a	 young	 couple	 have	 for	 each	 other;	Hêng,	DURATION	 (32),	 portrays	 the
permanent	relationships	of	marriage;	Chien,	DEVELOPMENT	(53),	 reflects	 the	protracted,	ceremonious
procedures	attending	the	arrangement	of	a	proper	marriage;	finally,	Kuei	Mei,	THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN,
shows	a	young	girl	under	the	guidance	of	an	older	man	who	marries	her.1

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN.
Undertakings	bring	misfortune.
Nothing	that	would	further.

A	girl	who	 is	 taken	 into	 the	 family,	 but	 not	 as	 the	 chief	wife,	must	 behave	with	 special	 caution	 and
reserve.	 She	must	 not	 take	 it	 upon	herself	 to	 supplant	 the	mistress	 of	 the	house,	 for	 that	would	mean
disorder	and	lead	to	untenable	relationships.
The	 same	 is	 true	 of	 all	 voluntary	 relationships	 between	 human	 beings.	 While	 legally	 regulated

relationships	 evince	 a	 fixed	 connection	 between	 duties	 and	 rights,	 relationships	 based	 on	 personal
inclination	depend	in	the	long	run	entirely	on	tactful	reserve.
Affection	as	the	essential	principle	of	relatedness	is	of	the	greatest	 importance	in	all	relationships	 in

the	world.	For	the	union	of	heaven	and	earth	is	the	origin	of	the	whole	of	nature.	Among	human	beings
likewise,	spontaneous	affection	is	the	all-inclusive	principle	of	union.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	over	the	lake:
The	image	of	THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN.
Thus	the	superior	man
Understands	the	transitory
In	the	light	of	the	eternity	of	the	end.

Thunder	stirs	the	water	of	the	lake,	which	follows	it	in	shimmering	waves.	This	symbolizes	the	girl	who
follows	the	man	of	her	choice.	But	every	relationship	between	individuals	bears	within	it	the	danger	that
wrong	 turns	 may	 be	 taken,	 leading	 to	 endless	 misunderstandings	 and	 disagreements.	 Therefore	 it	 is
necessary	constantly	to	remain	mindful	of	the	end.	If	we	permit	ourselves	to	drift	along,	we	come	together
and	are	parted	again	as	the	day	may	determine.	If	on	the	other	hand	a	man	fixes	his	mind	on	an	end	that
endures,	he	will	succeed	in	avoiding	the	reefs	that	confront	the	closer	relationships	of	people.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
The	marrying	maiden	as	a	concubine.
A	lame	man	who	is	able	to	tread.
Undertakings	bring	good	fortune.

The	 princes	 of	 ancient	 China	 maintained	 a	 fixed	 order	 of	 rank	 among	 the	 court	 ladies,	 who	 were
subordinated	to	the	queen	as	are	younger	sisters	to	the	eldest.	Frequently	they	came	from	the	family	of
the	queen,	who	herself	led	them	to	her	husband.
The	meaning	is	that	a	girl	entering	a	family	with	the	consent	of	the	wife	will	not	rank	outwardly	as	the

equal	of	the	latter	but	will	withdraw	modestly	into	the	background.	However,	if	she	understands	how	to	fit
herself	into	the	pattern	of	things,	her	position	will	be	entirely	satisfactory,	and	she	will	feel	sheltered	in
the	love	of	the	husband	to	whom	she	bears	children.
The	same	meaning	is	brought	out	in	the	relationships	between	officials.	A	man	may	enjoy	the	personal

friendship	of	 a	prince	and	be	 taken	 into	his	 confidence.	Outwardly	 this	man	must	 keep	 tactfully	 in	 the
background	behind	 the	official	ministers	of	 state,	but,	 although	he	 is	hampered	by	 this	 status,	 as	 if	 he
were	lame,	he	can	nevertheless	accomplish	something	through	the	kindliness	of	his	nature.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
A	one-eyed	man	who	is	able	to	see.
The	perseverance	of	a	solitary	man	furthers.

Here	the	situation	is	that	of	a	girl	married	to	a	man	who	has	disappointed	her.	Man	and	wife	ought	to
work	together	like	a	pair	of	eyes.	Here	the	girl	is	left	behind	in	loneliness;	the	man	of	her	choice	either
has	become	unfaithful	or	has	died.	But	she	does	not	lose	the	inner	light	of	loyalty.	Though	the	other	eye	is
gone,	she	maintains	her	loyalty	even	in	loneliness.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
The	marrying	maiden	as	a	slave.
She	marries	as	a	concubine.

A	girl	who	is	in	a	lowly	position	and	finds	no	husband	may,	in	some	circumstances,	still	win	shelter	as	a
concubine.
This	pictures	the	situation	of	a	person	who	longs	too	much	for	joys	that	cannot	be	obtained	in	the	usual



way.	 He	 enters	 upon	 a	 situation	 not	 altogether	 compatible	 with	 self-esteem.	 Neither	 judgment	 nor
warning	is	added	to	this	line;	it	merely	lays	bare	the	actual	situation,	so	that	everyone	may	draw	a	lesson
from	it.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	marrying	maiden	draws	out	the	allotted	time.
A	late	marriage	comes	in	due	course.

The	 girl	 is	 virtuous.	 She	 does	 not	 wish	 to	 throw	 herself	 away,	 and	 allows	 the	 customary	 time	 for
marriage	to	slip	by.	However,	there	 is	no	harm	in	this;	she	 is	rewarded	for	her	purity	and,	even	though
belatedly,	finds	the	husband	intended	for	her.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	sovereign	I	gave	his	daughter	in	marriage.
The	embroidered	garments	of	the	princess
Were	not	as	gorgeous
As	those	of	the	servingmaid.
The	moon	that	is	nearly	full
Brings	good	fortune.

The	 sovereign	 I	 is	 T’ang	 the	 Completer.	 This	 ruler	 decreed	 that	 the	 imperial	 princesses	 should	 be
subordinated	 to	 their	 husbands	 in	 the	 same	manner	 as	 other	women	 (cf.	 hexagram	11,	 six	 in	 the	 fifth
place).	The	emperor	does	not	wait	for	a	suitor	to	woo	his	daughter	but	gives	her	in	marriage	when	he	sees
fit.	Therefore	it	is	in	accord	with	custom	for	the	girl’s	family	to	take	the	initiative	here.
We	see	here	a	girl	of	aristocratic	birth	who	marries	a	man	of	modest	circumstances	and	understands

how	 to	adapt	herself	with	grace	 to	 the	new	situation.	She	 is	 free	of	all	 vanity	of	outer	adornment,	and
forgetting	her	rank	in	her	marriage,	takes	a	place	below	that	of	her	husband,	just	as	the	moon,	before	it	is
quite	full,	does	not	directly	face	the	sun.

Six	at	the	top	means:
The	woman	holds	the	basket,	but	there	are	no	fruits	in	it.
The	man	stabs	the	sheep,	but	no	blood	flows.
Nothing	that	acts	to	further.

At	the	sacrifice	to	the	ancestors,	the	woman	had	to	present	harvest	offerings	in	a	basket,	while	the	man
slaughtered	 the	 sacrificial	 animal	with	 his	 own	 hand.	Here	 the	 ritual	 is	 only	 superficially	 fulfilled;	 the
woman	takes	an	empty	basket	and	the	man	stabs	a	sheep	slaughtered	beforehand—solely	to	preserve	the
forms.	This	impious,	irreverent	attitude	bodes	no	good	for	a	marriage.



55.	Fêng	/	Abundance	[Fullness]

Chên	 is	 movement;	 Li	 is	 flame,	 whose	 attribute	 is	 clarity.	 Clarity	 within,	 movement	 without—this
produces	greatness	and	abundance.	The	hexagram	pictures	a	period	of	advanced	civilization.	However,
the	 fact	 that	 development	has	 reached	 a	 peak	 suggests	 that	 this	 extraordinary	 condition	 of	 abundance
cannot	be	maintained	permanently.

THE	JUDGMENT
ABUNDANCE	has	success.
The	king	attains	abundance.
Be	not	sad.
Be	like	the	sun	at	midday.

It	is	not	given	to	every	mortal	to	bring	about	a	time	of	outstanding	greatness	and	abundance.	Only	a
born	ruler	of	men	is	able	to	do	it,	because	his	will	is	directed	to	what	is	great.	Such	a	time	of	abundance	is
usually	 brief.	 Therefore	 a	 sage	 might	 well	 feel	 sad	 in	 view	 of	 the	 decline	 that	 must	 follow.	 But	 such
sadness	does	not	befit	 him.	Only	 a	man	who	 is	 inwardly	 free	of	 sorrow	and	care	 can	 lead	 in	 a	 time	of
abundance.	He	must	be	like	the	sun	at	midday,	illuminating	and	gladdening	everything	under	heaven.

THE	IMAGE
Both	thunder	and	lightning	come:
The	image	of	ABUNDANCE.
Thus	the	superior	man	decides	lawsuits
And	carries	out	punishments.

This	hexagram	has	a	certain	connection	with	Shih	Ho,	BITING	THROUGH	(21),	in	which	thunder	and
lightning	similarly	appear	together,	but	in	the	reverse	order.	In	BITING	THROUGH,	laws	are	laid	down;
here	they	are	applied	and	enforced.	Clarity	[Li]	within	makes	it	possible	to	investigate	the	facts	exactly,
and	shock	[Chên]	without	ensures	a	strict	and	precise	carrying	out	of	punishments.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
When	a	man	meets	his	destined	ruler,
They	can	be	together	ten	days,
And	it	is	not	a	mistake.
Going	meets	with	recognition.

To	 bring	 about	 a	 time	 of	 abundance,	 a	 union	 of	 clarity	 with	 energetic	 movement	 is	 needed.	 Two
individuals	possessed	of	 these	two	attributes	are	suited	to	each	other,	and	even	 if	 they	spend	an	entire
cycle	 of	 time	 together	 during	 the	 period	 of	 abundance,	 it	 will	 not	 be	 too	 long,	 nor	 is	 it	 a	 mistake.
Therefore	one	may	go	forth,	in	order	to	make	one’s	influence	felt;	it	will	meet	with	recognition.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	curtain	is	of	such	fullness
That	the	polestars	can	be	seen	at	noon.
Through	going	one	meets	with	mistrust	and	hate.
If	one	rouses	him	through	truth,
Good	fortune	comes.

It	often	happens	 that	plots	and	party	 intrigues,	which	have	 the	darkening	effect	of	an	eclipse	of	 the
sun,	come	between	a	ruler	intent	on	great	achievement	and	the	man	who	could	effect	great	undertakings.
Then,	instead	of	the	sun,	we	see	the	northern	stars	in	the	sky.	The	ruler	is	overshadowed	by	a	party	that
has	usurped	power.	If	a	man	at	such	a	time	were	to	try	to	take	energetic	measures,	he	would	encounter
only	mistrust	and	envy,	which	would	prohibit	all	movement.	The	essential	thing	then	is	to	hold	inwardly	to
the	power	of	truth,	which	in	the	end	is	so	strong	that	it	exerts	an	invisible	influence	on	the	ruler,	so	that
all	goes	well.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	underbrush	is	of	such	abundance
That	the	small	stars	can	be	seen	at	noon.
He	breaks	his	right	arm.	No	blame.

The	image	is	that	of	a	progressive	covering	over	of	the	sun.	Here	the	eclipse	reaches	totality,	therefore
even	the	small	stars	can	be	seen	at	noon.

In	the	sphere	of	social	relationships,	this	means	that	the	prince	is	now	so	eclipsed	that	even	the	most
insignificant	persons	can	push	themselves	into	the	foreground.	This	makes	it	impossible	for	an	able	man,
though	 he	 might	 be	 the	 right	 hand	 of	 the	 ruler,	 to	 undertake	 anything.	 It	 is	 as	 though	 his	 arm	 were
broken,	but	he	is	not	to	blame	for	being	thus	hindered	in	action.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	curtain	is	of	such	fullness
That	the	polestars	can	be	seen	at	noon.
He	meets	his	ruler,	who	is	of	like	kind.
Good	fortune.



Here	the	darkness	is	already	decreasing,	therefore	interrelated	elements	come	together.	Here	too	the
complement	must	be	found—the	necessary	wisdom	to	complement	joy	of	action.	Then	everything	will	go
well.	The	complementary	 factor	postulated	here	 is	 the	reverse	of	 the	one	 in	 the	 first	 line.	 In	 the	 latter,
wisdom	is	to	be	complemented	by	energy,	while	here	energy	is	complemented	by	wisdom.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Lines	are	coming,
Blessing	and	fame	draw	near.
Good	fortune.

The	ruler	is	modest	and	therefore	open	to	the	counsel	of	able	men.	Thus	he	is	surrounded	by	men	who
suggest	to	him	the	lines	of	action.	This	brings	blessing,	fame,	and	good	fortune	to	him	and	all	the	people.

Six	at	the	top	means:
His	house	is	in	a	state	of	abundance.
He	screens	off	his	family.
He	peers	through	the	gate
And	no	longer	perceives	anyone.
For	three	years	he	sees	nothing.
Misfortune.

This	 describes	 a	man	 who	 because	 of	 his	 arrogance	 and	 obstinacy	 attains	 the	 opposite	 of	 what	 he
strives	for.	He	seeks	abundance	and	splendor	for	his	dwelling.	He	wishes	at	all	odds	to	be	master	in	his
house,	which	so	alienates	his	family	that	in	the	end	he	finds	himself	completely	isolated.



56.	Lü	/	The	Wanderer

The	 mountain,	 Kên,	 stands	 still;	 above	 it	 fire,	 Li,	 flames	 up	 and	 does	 not	 tarry.	 Therefore	 the	 two
trigrams	do	not	stay	together.	Strange	lands	and	separation	are	the	wanderer’s	lot.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	WANDERER.	Success	through	smallness.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune
To	the	wanderer.

When	a	man	is	a	wanderer	and	stranger,	he	should	not	be	gruff	nor	overbearing.	He	has	no	large	circle
of	acquaintances,	therefore	he	should	not	give	himself	airs.	He	must	be	cautious	and	reserved;	in	this	way
he	protects	himself	from	evil.	If	he	is	obliging	toward	others,	he	wins	success.

A	wanderer	has	no	fixed	abode;	his	home	is	the	road.	Therefore	he	must	take	care	to	remain	upright
and	steadfast,	so	that	he	sojourns	only	in	the	proper	places,	associating	only	with	good	people.	Then	he
has	good	fortune	and	can	go	his	way	unmolested.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	THE	WANDERER.
Thus	the	superior	man
Is	clear-minded	and	cautious
In	imposing	penalties,
And	protracts	no	lawsuits.

When	grass	on	a	mountain	 takes	 fire,	 there	 is	bright	 light.	However,	 the	 fire	does	not	 linger	 in	 one
place,	but	travels	on	to	new	fuel.	It	is	a	phenomenon	of	short	duration.	This	is	what	penalties	and	lawsuits
should	be	like.	They	should	be	a	quickly	passing	matter,	and	must	not	be	dragged	out	indefinitely.	Prisons
ought	 to	 be	 places	 where	 people	 are	 lodged	 only	 temporarily,	 as	 guests	 are.	 They	 must	 not	 become
dwelling	places.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
If	the	wanderer	busies	himself	with	trivial	things,
He	draws	down	misfortune	upon	himself.

A	wanderer	should	not	demean	himself	or	busy	himself	with	 inferior	 things	he	meets	with	along	 the
way.	 The	 humbler	 and	 more	 defenseless	 his	 outward	 position,	 the	 more	 should	 he	 preserve	 his	 inner
dignity.	For	a	stranger	is	mistaken	if	he	hopes	to	find	a	friendly	reception	through	lending	himself	to	jokes
and	buffoonery.	The	result	will	be	only	contempt	and	insulting	treatment.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	wanderer	comes	to	an	inn.
He	has	his	property	with	him.
He	wins	the	steadfastness1	of	a	young	servant.

The	wanderer	 here	 described	 is	modest	 and	 reserved.	He	does	 not	 lose	 touch	with	 his	 inner	 being,
hence	he	finds	a	resting	place.	In	the	outside	world	he	does	not	lose	the	liking	of	other	people,	hence	all
persons	further	him,	so	that	he	can	acquire	property.	Moreover,	he	wins	the	allegiance	of	a	faithful	and
trustworthy	servant—a	thing	of	inestimable	value	to	a	wanderer.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	wanderer’s	inn	burns	down.
He	loses	the	steadfastness	of	his	young	servant.
Danger.

A	truculent	stranger	does	not	know	how	to	behave	properly.	He	meddles	 in	affairs	and	controversies
that	 do	 not	 concern	 him;	 thus	 he	 loses	 his	 resting	 place.	 He	 treats	 his	 servant	 with	 aloofness	 and
arrogance;	thus	he	loses	the	man’s	loyalty.	When	a	stranger	in	a	strange	land	has	no	one	left	on	whom	he
can	rely,	the	situation	becomes	very	dangerous.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	wanderer	rests	in	a	shelter.
He	obtains	his	property	and	an	ax.
My	heart	is	not	glad.

This	describes	a	wanderer	who	knows	how	to	limit	his	desires	outwardly,	though	he	is	inwardly	strong
and	 aspiring.	 Therefore	 he	 finds	 at	 least	 a	 place	 of	 shelter	 in	 which	 he	 can	 stay.	 He	 also	 succeeds	 in
acquiring	 property,	 but	 even	with	 this	 he	 is	 not	 secure.	He	must	 be	 always	 on	 guard,	 ready	 to	 defend
himself	with	arms.	Hence	he	is	not	at	ease.	He	is	persistently	conscious	of	being	a	stranger	in	a	strange
land.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
He	shoots	a	pheasant.
It	drops	with	the	first	arrow.
In	the	end	this	brings	both	praise	and	office.

Traveling	 statesmen	were	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 introducing	 themselves	 to	 local	 princes	 with	 the	 gift	 of	 a



pheasant.	Here	 the	wanderer	wants	 to	enter	 the	service	of	a	prince.	To	 this	end	he	shoots	a	pheasant,
killing	it	at	the	first	shot.	Thus	he	finds	friends	who	praise	and	recommend	him,	and	in	the	end	the	prince
accepts	him	and	confers	an	office	upon	him.

Circumstances	 often	 cause	 a	 man	 to	 seek	 a	 home	 in	 foreign	 parts.	 If	 he	 knows	 how	 to	 meet	 the
situation	and	how	to	 introduce	himself	 in	 the	right	way,	he	may	 find	a	circle	of	 friends	and	a	sphere	of
activity	even	in	a	strange	country.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
The	bird’s	nest	burns	up.
The	wanderer	laughs	at	first,
Then	must	needs	lament	and	weep.
Through	carelessness	he	loses	his	cow.
Misfortune.

The	picture	of	a	bird	whose	nest	burns	up	 indicates	 loss	of	one’s	resting	place.	This	misfortune	may
overtake	the	bird	if	it	is	heedless	and	imprudent	when	building	its	nest.	It	is	the	same	with	a	wanderer.	If
he	 lets	himself	 go,	 laughing	and	 jesting,	 and	 forgets	 that	he	 is	 a	wanderer,	 he	will	 later	have	 cause	 to
weep	and	lament.	For	if	through	carelessness	a	man	loses	his	cow—i.e.,	his	modesty	and	adaptability—evil
will	result.



57.	Sun	/	The	Gentle	(Penetrating,	Wind)

Sun	is	one	of	the	eight	doubled	trigrams.	It	is	the	eldest	daughter	and	symbolizes	wind	or	wood;	it	has
for	 its	 attribute	 gentleness,	 which	 nonetheless	 penetrates	 like	 the	wind	 or	 like	 growing	wood	with	 its
roots.
The	 dark	 principle,	 in	 itself	 rigid	 and	 immovable,	 is	 dissolved	 by	 the	 penetrating	 light	 principle,	 to

which	 it	 subordinates	 itself	 in	 gentleness.	 In	 nature,	 it	 is	 the	wind	 that	 disperses	 the	 gathered	 clouds,
leaving	the	sky	clear	and	serene.	In	human	life	it	is	penetrating	clarity	of	judgment	that	thwarts	all	dark
hidden	 motives.	 In	 the	 life	 of	 the	 community	 it	 is	 the	 powerful	 influence	 of	 a	 great	 personality	 that
uncovers	and	breaks	up	those	intrigues	which	shun	the	light	of	day.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	GENTLE.	Success	through	what	is	small.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.

Penetration	produces	gradual	and	inconspicuous	effects.	It	should	be	effected	not	by	an	act	of	violation
but	 by	 influence	 that	 never	 lapses.	 Results	 of	 this	 kind	 are	 less	 striking	 to	 the	 eye	 than	 those	won	 by
surprise	attack,	but	they	are	more	enduring	and	more	complete.	If	one	would	produce	such	effects,	one
must	 have	 a	 clearly	 defined	 goal,	 for	 only	 when	 the	 penetrating	 influence	 works	 always	 in	 the	 same
direction	can	the	object	be	attained.	Small	strength	can	achieve	its	purpose	only	by	subordinating	itself	to
an	eminent	man	who	is	capable	of	creating	order.

THE	IMAGE
Winds	following	one	upon	the	other:
The	image	of	THE	GENTLY	PENETRATING.
Thus	the	superior	man
Spreads	his	commands	abroad
And	carries	out	his	undertakings.

The	penetrating	quality	of	the	wind	depends	upon	its	ceaselessness.	This	is	what	makes	it	so	powerful;
time	is	its	instrument.	In	the	same	way	the	ruler’s	thought	should	penetrate	the	soul	of	the	people.	This
too	requires	a	lasting	influence	brought	about	by	enlightenment	and	command.	Only	when	the	command
has	been	assimilated	by	the	people	is	action	in	accordance	with	it	possible.	Action	without	preparation	of
the	ground	only	frightens	and	repels.

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning	means:
In	advancing	and	in	retreating,
The	perseverance	of	a	warrior	furthers.

Inborn	gentleness	 is	often	carried	to	the	point	of	 indecisiveness.	One	does	not	 feel	strong	enough	to
advance	 resolutely.	 A	 thousand	 doubts	 crop	 up;	 one	 is,	 however,	 not	 minded	 to	 withdraw	 but	 drifts
indecisively	 to	 and	 fro.	 In	 such	 a	 situation,	 a	 military	 decisiveness	 is	 the	 proper	 thing,	 so	 that	 one
resolutely	does	what	order	demands.	Resolute	discipline	is	far	better	than	irresolute	license.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Penetration	under	the	bed.
Priests	and	magicians	are	used	in	great	number.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.

At	 times	one	has	 to	deal	with	hidden	enemies,	 intangible	 influences	 that	slink	 into	dark	corners	and
from	this	hiding	affect	people	by	suggestion.	 In	 instances	 like	 this,	 it	 is	necessary	 to	 trace	 these	 things
back	to	the	most	secret	recesses,	in	order	to	determine	the	nature	of	the	influences	to	be	dealt	with.	This
is	the	task	of	the	priests;	removing	the	influences	is	the	task	of	the	magicians.	The	very	anonymity	of	such
plotting	requires	an	especially	vigorous	and	 indefatigable	effort,	but	 this	 is	well	worth	while.	For	when
such	elusive	influences	are	brought	into	the	light	and	branded,	they	lose	their	power	over	people.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
Repeated	penetration.	Humiliation.

Penetrating	reflection	must	not	be	pushed	too	far,	lest	it	cripple	the	power	of	decision.	After	a	matter
has	been	thoroughly	pondered,	it	is	essential	to	form	a	decision	and	to	act.	Repeated	deliberation	brings
fresh	doubts	and	scruples,	and	thereby	humiliation,	because	one	shows	oneself	unable	to	act.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Remorse	vanishes.
During	the	hunt
Three	kinds	of	game	are	caught.

When	 a	 responsible	 position	 and	 accumulated	 experience	 lead	 one	 to	 combine	 innate	modesty	with
energetic	action,	great	success	is	assured.	The	three	kinds	of	animals	referred	to	served	for	offerings	to
the	gods,	for	feasting	guests,	and	for	everyday	consumption.	When	the	catch	answered	all	three	purposes,
the	hunt	was	considered	especially	successful.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.



Remorse	vanishes.
Nothing	that	does	not	further.
No	beginning,	but	an	end.
Before	the	change,	three	days.
After	the	change,	three	days.
Good	fortune.

In	the	situation	described	in	Ku,	WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED	(18),	an	entirely	new	point	of
departure	must	be	set	up,	whereas	here	it	is	only	a	question	of	reforms.	The	beginning	has	not	been	good,
but	 the	moment	 has	 been	 reached	when	 a	 new	 direction	 can	 be	 taken.	 Change	 and	 improvement	 are
called	for.	Such	steps	must	be	undertaken	with	steadfastness,	that	is,	with	a	firm	and	correct	attitude	of
mind;	 then	 they	 will	 succeed,	 and	 remorse	 will	 disappear.	 But	 it	 must	 be	 remembered	 that	 such
improvements	require	careful	consideration.	Before	a	change	is	made,	it	must	be	pondered	over	again	and
again.	 After	 the	 change	 is	 made,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 note	 carefully	 for	 some	 time	 after	 how	 the
improvements	bear	the	test	of	actuality.	Such	careful	work	is	accompanied	by	good	fortune.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Penetration	under	the	bed.
He	loses	his	property	and	his	ax.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.

A	man’s	 understanding	 is	 sufficiently	 penetrating.	 He	 follows	 up	 injurious	 influences	 into	 the	 most
secret	corners.	But	he	no	longer	has	the	strength	to	combat	them	decisively.	In	this	case	any	attempt	to
penetrate	into	the	personal	domain	of	darkness	would	only	bring	harm.



58.	Tui	/	The	Joyous,	Lake

This	hexagram,	like	Sun,	is	one	of	the	eight	formed	by	doubling	of	a	trigram.	The	trigram	Tui	denotes
the	youngest	daughter;	 it	 is	symbolized	by	 the	smiling	 lake,	and	 its	attribute	 is	 joyousness.	Contrary	 to
appearances,	it	 is	not	the	yielding	quality	of	the	top	line	that	accounts	for	joy	here.	The	attribute	of	the
yielding	or	dark	principle	 is	not	 joy	but	melancholy.	However,	 joy	 is	 indicated	by	the	fact	that	there	are
two	strong	lines	within,	expressing	themselves	through	the	medium	of	gentleness.
True	joy,	therefore,	rests	on	firmness	and	strength	within,	manifesting	itself	outwardly	as	yielding	and

gentle.
THE	JUDGMENT
THE	JOYOUS.	Success.
Perseverance	is	favorable.

The	joyous	mood	is	infectious	and	therefore	brings	success.	But	joy	must	be	based	on	steadfastness	if	it
is	not	to	degenerate	into	uncontrolled	mirth.	Truth	and	strength	must	dwell	in	the	heart,	while	gentleness
reveals	 itself	 in	social	 intercourse.	In	this	way	one	assumes	the	right	attitude	toward	God	and	man	and
achieves	 something.	 Under	 certain	 conditions,	 intimidation	 without	 gentleness	may	 achieve	 something
momentarily,	but	not	 for	all	 time.	When,	on	 the	other	hand,	 the	hearts	of	men	are	won	by	 friendliness,
they	are	led	to	take	all	hardships	upon	themselves	willingly,	and	if	need	be	will	not	shun	death	itself,	so
great	is	the	power	of	joy	over	men.

THE	IMAGE
Lakes	resting	one	on	the	other:
The	image	of	THE	JOYOUS.
Thus	the	superior	man	joins	with	his	friends
For	discussion	and	practice.

A	lake	evaporates	upward	and	thus	gradually	dries	up;	but	when	two	lakes	are	joined	they	do	not	dry
up	so	readily,	for	one	replenishes	the	other.	It	is	the	same	in	the	field	of	knowledge.	Knowledge	should	be
a	 refreshing	 and	 vitalizing	 force.	 It	 becomes	 so	 only	 through	 stimulating	 intercourse	 with	 congenial
friends	with	whom	one	holds	discussion	and	practices	application	of	the	truths	of	life.	In	this	way	learning
becomes	many-sided	and	takes	on	a	cheerful	lightness,	whereas	there	is	always	something	ponderous	and
one-sided	about	the	learning	of	the	self-taught.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Contented	joyousness.	Good	fortune.

A	 quiet,	 wordless,	 self-contained	 joy,	 desiring	 nothing	 from	 without	 and	 resting	 content	 with
everything,	 remains	 free	of	all	egotistic	 likes	and	dislikes.	 In	 this	 freedom	 lies	good	 fortune,	because	 it
harbors	the	quiet	security	of	a	heart	fortified	within	itself.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Sincere	joyousness.	Good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.

We	 often	 find	 ourselves	 associating	 with	 inferior	 people	 in	 whose	 company	 we	 are	 tempted	 by
pleasures	 that	are	 inappropriate	 for	 the	superior	man.	To	participate	 in	 such	pleasures	would	certainly
bring	remorse,	for	a	superior	man	can	find	no	real	satisfaction	in	low	pleasures.	When,	recognizing	this,	a
man	does	not	permit	his	will	to	swerve,	so	that	he	does	not	find	such	ways	agreeable,	not	even	dubious
companions	will	 venture	 to	 proffer	 any	 base	 pleasures,	 because	 he	would	 not	 enjoy	 them.	 Thus	 every
cause	for	regret	is	removed.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Coming	joyousness.	Misfortune.

True	joy	must	spring	from	within.	But	if	one	is	empty	within	and	wholly	given	over	to	the	world,	idle
pleasures	come	streaming	 in	 from	without.	This	 is	what	many	people	welcome	as	diversion.	Those	who
lack	 inner	 stability	 and	 therefore	 need	 amusement,	 will	 always	 find	 opportunity	 of	 indulgence.	 They
attract	external	pleasures	by	the	emptiness	of	their	natures.	Thus	they	lose	themselves	more	and	more,
which	of	course	has	bad	results.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Joyousness	that	is	weighed	is	not	at	peace.
After	ridding	himself	of	mistakes	a	man	has	joy.

Often	a	man	finds	himself	weighing	the	choice	between	various	kinds	of	pleasures,	and	so	long	as	he
has	not	decided	which	kind	he	will	choose,	the	higher	or	the	lower,	he	has	no	inner	peace.	Only	when	he
clearly	recognizes	 that	passion	brings	suffering,	can	he	make	up	his	mind	 to	 turn	away	 from	the	 lower
pleasures	and	to	strive	for	the	higher.	Once	this	decision	is	sealed,	he	finds	true	joy	and	peace,	and	inner
conflict	is	overcome.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Sincerity	toward	disintegrating	influences	is	dangerous.

Dangerous	elements	approach	even	the	best	of	men.	If	a	man	permits	himself	to	have	anything	to	do



with	them,	their	disintegrating	influence	acts	slowly	but	surely,	and	inevitably	brings	dangers	in	its	train.
But	if	he	recognizes	the	situation	and	can	comprehend	the	danger,	he	knows	how	to	protect	himself	and
remains	unharmed.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Seductive	joyousness.

A	vain	nature	invites	diverting	pleasures	and	must	suffer	accordingly	(cf.	the	six	in	the	third	place).	If	a
man	is	unstable	within,	the	pleasures	of	the	world	that	he	does	not	shun	have	so	powerful	an	influence
that	he	is	swept	along	by	them.	Here	it	is	no	longer	a	question	of	danger,	of	good	fortune	or	misfortune.
He	has	given	up	direction	of	his	own	life,	and	what	becomes	of	him	depends	upon	chance	and	external
influences.



59.	Huan	/	Dispersion	[Dissolution]

Wind	blowing	over	water	disperses	it,	dissolving	it	into	foam	and	mist.	This	suggests	that	when	a	man’s
vital	 energy	 is	 dammed	 up	 within	 him	 (indicated	 as	 a	 danger	 by	 the	 attribute	 of	 the	 lower	 trigram),
gentleness	serves	to	break	up	and	dissolve	the	blockage.

THE	JUDGMENT
DISPERSION.	Success.
The	king	approaches	his	temple.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Perseverance	furthers.

The	 text	 of	 this	 hexagram	 resembles	 that	 of	 Ts’ui,	 GATHERING	 TOGETHER	 (45).	 In	 the	 latter,	 the
subject	is	the	bringing	together	of	elements	that	have	been	separated,	as	water	collects	in	lakes	upon	the
earth.	Here	the	subject	is	the	dispersing	and	dissolving	of	divisive	egotism.	DISPERSION	shows	the	way,
so	to	speak,	that	leads	to	gathering	together.	This	explains	the	similarity	of	the	two	texts.

Religious	forces	are	needed	to	overcome	the	egotism	that	divides	men.	The	common	celebration	of	the
great	 sacrificial	 feasts	 and	 sacred	 rites,	which	 gave	 expression	 simultaneously	 to	 the	 interrelation	 and
social	 articulation	 of	 family	 and	 state,	was	 the	means	 employed	 by	 the	 great	 rulers	 to	 unite	men.	 The
sacred	music	and	the	splendor	of	the	ceremonies	aroused	a	strong	tide	of	emotion	that	was	shared	by	all
hearts	in	unison,	and	that	awakened	a	consciousness	of	the	common	origin	of	all	creatures.	 In	this	way
disunity	was	overcome	and	rigidity	dissolved.	A	 further	means	to	 the	same	end	 is	co-operation	 in	great
general	undertakings	that	set	a	high	goal	for	the	will	of	the	people;	in	the	common	concentration	on	this
goal,	all	barriers	dissolve,	just	as,	when	a	boat	is	crossing	a	great	stream,	all	hands	must	unite	in	a	joint
task.

But	only	a	man	who	is	himself	free	of	all	selfish	ulterior	considerations,	and	who	perseveres	in	justice
and	steadfastness,	is	capable	of	so	dissolving	the	hardness	of	egotism.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	drives	over	the	water:
The	image	of	DISPERSION.
Thus	the	kings	of	old	sacrificed	to	the	Lord
And	built	temples.

In	the	autumn	and	winter,	water	begins	to	freeze	into	ice.	When	the	warm	breezes	of	spring	come,	the
rigidity	 is	dissolved,	and	the	elements	that	have	been	dispersed	in	 ice	floes	are	reunited.	It	 is	the	same
with	 the	minds	of	 the	people.	Through	hardness	and	selfishness	 the	heart	grows	rigid,	and	this	rigidity
leads	to	separation	from	all	others.	Egotism	and	cupidity	isolate	men.	Therefore	the	hearts	of	men	must
be	seized	by	a	devout	emotion.	They	must	be	shaken	by	a	religious	awe	in	face	of	eternity—stirred	with	an
intuition	 of	 the	 One	 Creator	 of	 all	 living	 beings,	 and	 united	 through	 the	 strong	 feeling	 of	 fellowship
experienced	in	the	ritual	of	divine	worship.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
He	brings	help	with	the	strength	of	a	horse.
Good	fortune.

It	is	important	that	disunion	should	be	overcome	at	the	outset,	before	it	has	become	complete—that	the
clouds	 should	 be	 dispersed	 before	 they	 have	 brought	 storm	 and	 rain.	 At	 such	 times	 when	 hidden
divergences	in	temper	make	themselves	felt	and	lead	to	mutual	misunderstandings,	we	must	take	quick
and	vigorous	action	to	dissolve	the	misunderstandings	and	mutual	distrust.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
At	the	dissolution
He	hurries	to	that	which	supports	him.
Remorse	disappears.

When	an	individual	discovers	within	himself	the	beginnings	of	alienation	from	others,	of	misanthropy
and	ill	humor,	he	must	set	about	dissolving	these	obstructions.	He	must	rouse	himself	inwardly,	hasten	to
that	 which	 supports	 him.	 Such	 support	 is	 never	 found	 in	 hatred,	 but	 always	 in	 a	 moderate	 and	 just
judgment	of	men,	linked	with	good	will.	If	he	regains	this	unobstructed	outlook	on	humanity,	while	at	the
same	time	all	saturnine	ill	humor	is	dissolved,	all	occasion	for	remorse	disappears.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
He	dissolves	his	self.	No	remorse.

Under	 certain	 circumstances,	 a	man’s	work	may	 become	 so	 difficult	 that	 he	 can	 no	 longer	 think	 of
himself.	He	must	set	aside	all	personal	desires	and	disperse	whatever	the	self	gathers	about	it	to	serve	as
a	barrier	against	others.	Only	on	the	basis	of	a	great	renunciation	can	he	obtain	the	strength	 for	great
achievements.	By	setting	his	goal	in	a	great	task	outside	himself,	he	can	attain	this	standpoint.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
He	dissolves	his	bond	with	his	group.1
Supreme	good	fortune.



Dispersion	leads	in	turn	to	accumulation.
This	is	something	that	ordinary	men	do	not	think	of.

When	we	are	working	at	a	task	that	affects	the	general	welfare,	we	must	leave	all	private	friendships
out	of	account.	Only	by	rising	above	party	interests	can	we	achieve	something	decisive.	He	who	has	the
courage	thus	to	 forego	what	 is	near	wins	what	 is	afar.	But	 in	order	to	comprehend	this	standpoint,	one
must	have	a	wide	view	of	the	interrelationships	of	life,	such	as	only	unusual	men	attain.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
His	loud	cries	are	as	dissolving	as	sweat.
Dissolution!	A	king	abides	without	blame.

In	times	of	general	dispersion	and	separation,	a	great	idea	provides	a	focal	point	for	the	organization	of
recovery.	Just	as	an	illness	reaches	its	crisis	in	a	dissolving	sweat,	so	a	great	and	stimulating	idea	is	a	true
salvation	in	times	of	general	deadlock.	It	gives	the	people	a	rallying	point—a	man	in	a	ruling	position	who
can	dispel	misunderstandings.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
He	dissolves	his	blood.
Departing,	keeping	at	a	distance,	going	out,
Is	without	blame.

The	idea	of	the	dissolving	of	a	man’s	blood	means	the	dispersion	of	that	which	might	lead	to	bloodshed
and	 wounds,	 i.e.,	 avoidance	 of	 danger.	 But	 here	 the	 thought	 is	 not	 that	 a	 man	 avoids	 difficulties	 for
himself	alone,	but	rather	that	he	rescues	his	kin—helps	them	to	get	away	before	danger	comes,	or	to	keep
at	a	distance	from	an	existing	danger,	or	to	find	a	way	out	of	a	danger	that	is	already	upon	them.	In	this
way	he	does	what	is	right.



60.	Chieh	/	Limitation

A	lake	occupies	a	limited	space.	When	more	water	comes	into	it,	it	overflows.	Therefore	limits	must	be
set	for	the	water.	The	image	shows	water	below	and	water	above,	with	the	firmament	between	them	as	a
limit.

The	 Chinese	word	 for	 limitation	 really	 denotes	 the	 joints	 that	 divide	 a	 bamboo	 stalk.	 In	 relation	 to
ordinary	life	it	means	the	thrift	that	sets	fixed	limits	upon	expenditures.	In	relation	to	the	moral	sphere	it
means	 the	 fixed	 limits	 that	 the	 superior	 man	 sets	 upon	 his	 actions—the	 limits	 of	 loyalty	 and
disinterestedness.

THE	JUDGMENT
LIMITATION.	Success.
Galling	limitation	must	not	be	persevered	in.

Limitations	 are	 troublesome,	 but	 they	 are	 effective.	 If	we	 live	 economically	 in	normal	 times,	we	are
prepared	for	times	of	want.	To	be	sparing	saves	us	from	humiliation.	Limitations	are	also	indispensable	in
the	regulation	of	world	conditions.	In	nature	there	are	fixed	limits	for	summer	and	winter,	day	and	night,
and	 these	 limits	 give	 the	 year	 its	 meaning.	 In	 the	 same	 way,	 economy,	 by	 setting	 fixed	 limits	 upon
expenditures,	acts	to	preserve	property	and	prevent	injury	to	the	people.

But	in	limitation	we	must	observe	due	measure.	If	a	man	should	seek	to	impose	galling	limitations	upon
his	own	nature,	it	would	be	injurious.	And	if	he	should	go	too	far	in	imposing	limitations	on	others,	they
would	rebel.	Therefore	it	is	necessary	to	set	limits	even	upon	limitation.

THE	IMAGE
Water	over	lake:	the	image	of
LIMITATION.
Thus	the	superior	man
Creates	number	and	measure,
And	examines	the	nature	of	virtue	and	correct	conduct.

A	 lake	 is	something	 limited.	Water	 is	 inexhaustible.	A	 lake	can	contain	only	a	definite	amount	of	 the
infinite	 quantity	 of	 water;	 this	 is	 its	 peculiarity.	 In	 human	 life	 too	 the	 individual	 achieves	 significance
through	discrimination	and	the	setting	of	limits.	Therefore	what	concerns	us	here	is	the	problem	of	clearly
defining	 these	discriminations,	which	are,	 so	 to	speak,	 the	backbone	of	morality.	Unlimited	possibilities
are	not	suited	to	man;	if	they	existed,	his	life	would	only	dissolve	in	the	boundless.	To	become	strong,	a
man’s	 life	 needs	 the	 limitations	 ordained	 by	 duty	 and	 voluntarily	 accepted.	 The	 individual	 attains
significance	 as	 a	 free	 spirit	 only	 by	 surrounding	 himself	with	 these	 limitations	 and	 by	 determining	 for
himself	what	his	duty	is.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Not	going	out	of	the	door	and	the	courtyard
Is	without	blame.

Often	 a	 man	 who	 would	 like	 to	 undertake	 something	 finds	 himself	 confronted	 by	 insurmountable
limitations.	Then	he	must	know	where	to	stop.	If	he	rightly	understands	this	and	does	not	go	beyond	the
limits	set	for	him,	he	accumulates	an	energy	that	enables	him,	when	the	proper	time	comes,	to	act	with
great	 force.	Discretion	 is	of	prime	 importance	 in	preparing	 the	way	 for	momentous	 things.	Concerning
this,	Confucius	says:

“Where	disorder	develops,	words	are	the	first	steps.	If	the	prince	is	not	discreet,	he	loses	his	servant.	If
the	 servant	 is	not	discreet,	 he	 loses	his	 life.	 If	 germinating	 things	 are	not	 handled	with	discretion,	 the
perfecting	of	them	is	impeded.	Therefore	the	superior	man	is	careful	to	maintain	silence	and	does	not	go
forth.”

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
Not	going	out	of	the	gate	and	the	courtyard
Brings	misfortune.

When	the	time	for	action	has	come,	the	moment	must	be	quickly	seized.	Just	as	water	first	collects	in	a
lake	without	flowing	out,	yet	is	certain	to	find	an	outlet	when	the	lake	is	full,	so	it	is	in	the	life	of	man.	It	is
a	good	thing	to	hesitate	so	long	as	the	time	for	action	has	not	come,	but	no	longer.	Once	the	obstacles	to
action	have	been	removed,	anxious	hesitation	 is	a	mistake	 that	 is	bound	 to	bring	disaster,	because	one
misses	one’s	opportunity.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
He	who	knows	no	limitation
Will	have	cause	to	lament.
No	blame.

If	an	individual	is	bent	only	on	pleasures	and	enjoyment,	it	is	easy	for	him	to	lose	his	sense	of	the	limits
that	are	necessary.	If	he	gives	himself	over	to	extravagance,	he	will	have	to	suffer	the	consequences,	with
accompanying	 regret.	 He	 must	 not	 seek	 to	 lay	 the	 blame	 on	 others.	 Only	 when	 we	 realize	 that	 our
mistakes	are	of	our	own	making	will	such	disagreeable	experiences	free	us	of	errors.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:



Contented	limitation.	Success.
Every	limitation	has	its	value,	but	a	limitation	that	requires	persistent	effort	entails	a	cost	of	too	much

energy.	When,	however,	the	limitation	is	a	natural	one	(as	for	example,	the	limitation	by	which	water	flows
only	 downhill),	 it	 necessarily	 leads	 to	 success,	 for	 then	 it	 means	 a	 saving	 of	 energy.	 The	 energy	 that
otherwise	would	be	consumed	 in	a	vain	struggle	with	 the	object,	 is	applied	wholly	 to	 the	benefit	of	 the
matter	in	hand,	and	success	is	assured.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Sweet	limitation	brings	good	fortune.
Going	brings	esteem.

The	 limitation	 must	 be	 carried	 out	 in	 the	 right	 way	 if	 it	 is	 to	 be	 effective.	 If	 we	 seek	 to	 impose
restrictions	on	others	only,	while	evading	them	ourselves,	these	restrictions	will	always	be	resented	and
will	 provoke	 resistance.	 If,	 however,	 a	man	 in	 a	 leading	 position	 applies	 the	 limitation	 first	 to	 himself,
demanding	little	from	those	associated	with	him,	and	with	modest	means	manages	to	achieve	something,
good	fortune	 is	the	result.	Where	such	an	example	occurs,	 it	meets	with	emulation,	so	that	whatever	 is
undertaken	must	succeed.

Six	at	the	top	means:
Galling	limitation.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
Remorse	disappears.

If	one	is	too	severe	in	setting	up	restrictions,	people	will	not	endure	them.	The	more	consistent	such
severity,	the	worse	it	is,	for	in	the	long	run	a	reaction	is	unavoidable.	In	the	same	way,	the	tormented	body
will	rebel	against	excessive	asceticism.	On	the	other	hand,	although	ruthless	severity	is	not	to	be	applied
persistently	and	systematically,	there	may	be	times	when	it	is	the	only	means	of	safeguarding	against	guilt
and	remorse.	In	such	situations	ruthlessness	toward	oneself	is	the	only	means	of	saving	one’s	soul,	which
otherwise	would	succumb	to	irresolution	and	temptation.



61.	Chung	Fu	/	Inner	Truth

The	wind	blows	over	 the	 lake	and	stirs	 the	 surface	of	 the	water.	Thus	visible	effects	of	 the	 invisible
manifest	themselves.	The	hexagram	consists	of	firm	lines	above	and	below,	while	it	is	open	in	the	center.
This	indicates	a	heart	free	of	prejudices	and	therefore	open	to	truth.	On	the	other	hand,	each	of	the	two
trigrams	 has	 a	 firm	 line	 in	 the	 middle;	 this	 indicates	 the	 force	 of	 inner	 truth	 in	 the	 influences	 they
represent.

The	 attributes	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams	 are:	 above,	 gentleness,	 forbearance	 toward	 inferiors;	 below,
joyousness	 in	 obeying	 superiors.	 Such	 conditions	 create	 the	 basis	 of	 a	 mutual	 confidence	 that	 makes
achievements	possible.

The	character	fu	(“truth”)	is	actually	the	picture	of	a	bird’s	foot	over	a	fledgling.	It	suggests	the	idea	of
brooding.	An	egg	is	hollow.	The	light-giving	power	must	work	to	quicken	it	from	outside,	but	there	must
be	 a	 germ	 of	 life	within,	 if	 life	 is	 to	 be	 awakened.	 Far-reaching	 speculations	 can	 be	 linked	with	 these
ideas.

THE	JUDGMENT
INNER	TRUTH.	Pigs	and	fishes.
Good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Perseverance	furthers.

Pigs	and	fishes	are	the	least	intelligent	of	all	animals	and	therefore	the	most	difficult	to	influence.	The
force	of	inner	truth	must	grow	great	indeed	before	its	influence	can	extend	to	such	creatures.	In	dealing
with	persons	 as	 intractable	 and	as	difficult	 to	 influence	 as	 a	 pig	 or	 a	 fish,	 the	whole	 secret	 of	 success
depends	on	finding	the	right	way	of	approach.	One	must	first	rid	oneself	of	all	prejudice	and,	so	to	speak,
let	the	psyche	of	the	other	person	act	on	one	without	restraint.	Then	one	will	establish	contact	with	him,
understand	and	gain	power	over	him.	When	a	door	has	thus	been	opened,	the	force	of	one’s	personality
will	influence	him.	If	in	this	way	one	finds	no	obstacles	insurmountable,	one	can	undertake	even	the	most
dangerous	things,	such	as	crossing	the	great	water,	and	succeed.

But	it	is	important	to	understand	upon	what	the	force	of	inner	truth	depends.	This	force	is	not	identical
with	simple	intimacy	or	a	secret	bond.	Close	ties	may	exist	also	among	thieves;	it	is	true	that	such	a	bond
acts	as	a	force	but,	since	it	is	not	invincible,	it	does	not	bring	good	fortune.	All	association	on	the	basis	of
common	interests	holds	only	up	to	a	certain	point.	Where	the	community	of	interest	ceases,	the	holding
together	ceases	also,	and	the	closest	friendship	often	changes	into	hate.	Only	when	the	bond	is	based	on
what	is	right,	on	steadfastness,	will	it	remain	so	firm	that	it	triumphs	over	everything.

THE	IMAGE
Wind	over	lake:	the	image	of	INNER
TRUTH.
Thus	the	superior	man	discusses	criminal	cases
In	order	to	delay	executions.

Wind	stirs	water	by	penetrating	it.	Thus	the	superior	man,	when	obliged	to	judge	the	mistakes	of	men,
tries	 to	 penetrate	 their	 minds	 with	 understanding,	 in	 order	 to	 gain	 a	 sympathetic	 appreciation	 of	 the
circumstances.	In	ancient	China,	the	entire	administration	of	justice	was	guided	by	this	principle.	A	deep
understanding	that	knows	how	to	pardon	was	considered	the	highest	form	of	justice.	This	system	was	not
without	success,	for	its	aim	was	to	make	so	strong	a	moral	 impression	that	there	was	no	reason	to	fear
abuse	of	such	mildness.	For	it	sprang	not	from	weakness	but	from	a	superior	clarity.
	

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
Being	prepared	brings	good	fortune.
If	there	are	secret	designs,	it	is	disquieting.

The	force	of	inner	truth	depends	chiefly	on	inner	stability	and	preparedness.	From	this	state	of	mind
springs	 the	 correct	 attitude	 toward	 the	 outer	 world.	 But	 if	 a	 man	 should	 try	 to	 cultivate	 secret
relationships	 of	 a	 special	 sort,	 it	 would	 deprive	 him	 of	 his	 inner	 independence.	 The	more	 reliance	 he
places	on	the	support	of	others,	the	more	uneasy	and	anxious	he	will	become	as	to	whether	these	secret
ties	are	really	tenable.	In	this	way	inner	peace	and	the	force	of	inner	truth	are	lost.

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
A	crane	calling	in	the	shade.
Its	young	answers	it.
I	have	a	good	goblet.
I	will	share	it	with	you.

This	 refers	 to	 the	 involuntary	 influence	 of	 a	man’s	 inner	 being	 upon	 persons	 of	 kindred	 spirit.	 The
crane	need	not	show	itself	on	a	high	hill.	It	may	be	quite	hidden	when	it	sounds	its	call;	yet	its	young	will
hear	 its	 note,	 will	 recognize	 it	 and	 give	 answer.	Where	 there	 is	 a	 joyous	 mood,	 there	 a	 comrade	 will
appear	to	share	a	glass	of	wine.



This	is	the	echo	awakened	in	men	through	spiritual	attraction.	Whenever	a	feeling	is	voiced	with	truth
and	 frankness,	 whenever	 a	 deed	 is	 the	 clear	 expression	 of	 sentiment,	 a	 mysterious	 and	 far-reaching
influence	is	exerted.	At	first	it	acts	on	those	who	are	inwardly	receptive.	But	the	circle	grows	larger	and
larger.	The	root	of	all	influence	lies	in	one’s	own	inner	being:	given	true	and	vigorous	expression	in	word
and	deed,	its	effect	is	great.	The	effect	is	but	the	reflection	of	something	that	emanates	from	one’s	own
heart.	Any	deliberate	 intention	of	an	effect	would	only	destroy	the	possibility	of	producing	it.	Confucius
says	about	this	line:

“The	superior	man	abides	in	his	room.	If	his	words	are	well	spoken,	he	meets	with	assent	at	a	distance
of	more	than	a	thousand	miles.	How	much	more	then	from	near	by!	If	the	superior	man	abides	in	his	room
and	his	words	are	not	well	 spoken,	he	meets	with	contradiction	at	a	distance	of	more	 than	a	 thousand
miles.	How	much	more	then	from	near	by!	Words	go	forth	from	one’s	own	person	and	exert	their	influence
on	men.	Deeds	are	born	close	at	hand	and	become	visible	far	away.	Words	and	deeds	are	the	hinge	and
bowspring	 of	 the	 superior	man.	 As	 hinge	 and	 bowspring	move,	 they	 bring	 honor	 or	 disgrace.	 Through
words	and	deeds	the	superior	man	moves	heaven	and	earth.	Must	one	not,	then,	be	cautious?”

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
He	finds	a	comrade.
Now	he	beats	the	drum,	now	he	stops.
Now	he	sobs,	now	he	sings.

Here	the	source	of	a	man’s	strength	lies	not	in	himself	but	in	his	relation	to	other	people.	No	matter
how	close	to	them	he	may	be,	if	his	center	of	gravity	depends	on	them,	he	is	inevitably	tossed	to	and	fro
between	 joy	 and	 sorrow.	 Rejoicing	 to	 high	 heaven,	 then	 sad	 unto	 death—this	 is	 the	 fate	 of	 those	who
depend	upon	an	inner	accord	with	other	persons	whom	they	love.	Here	we	have	only	the	statement	of	the
law	that	this	is	so.	Whether	this	condition	is	felt	to	be	an	affliction	or	the	supreme	happiness	of	love,	is	left
to	the	subjective	verdict	of	the	person	concerned.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	moon	nearly	at	the	full.
The	team	horse	goes	astray.
No	blame.

To	 intensify	 the	 power	 of	 inner	 truth,	 a	 man	 must	 always	 turn	 to	 his	 superior,	 from	 whom	 he	 can
receive	enlightenment	as	the	moon	receives	light	from	the	sun.	However,	this	requires	a	certain	humility,
like	that	of	the	moon	when	it	is	not	yet	quite	full.	At	the	moment	when	the	moon	becomes	full	and	stands
directly	opposite	 the	 sun,	 it	begins	 to	wane.	 Just	as	on	 the	one	hand	we	must	be	humble	and	 reverent
when	 face	 to	 face	 with	 the	 source	 of	 enlightenment,	 so	 likewise	 must	 we	 on	 the	 other	 renounce
factionalism	 among	men.	Only	 by	 pursuing	 one’s	 course	 like	 a	 horse	 that	 goes	 straight	 ahead	without
looking	sidewise	at	its	mate,	can	one	retain	the	inner	freedom	that	helps	one	onward.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
He	possesses	truth,	which	links	together.
No	blame.

This	describes	the	ruler	who	holds	all	elements	together	by	the	power	of	his	personality.	Only	when	the
strength	of	his	character	is	so	ample	that	he	can	influence	all	who	are	subject	to	him,	is	he	as	he	needs	to
be.	The	power	of	 suggestion	must	 emanate	 from	 the	 ruler.	 It	will	 firmly	knit	 together	 and	unite	 all	 his
adherents.	Without	this	central	force,	all	external	unity	is	only	deception	and	breaks	down	at	the	decisive
moment.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
Cockcrow	penetrating	to	heaven.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.

The	cock	is	dependable.	It	crows	at	dawn.	But	it	cannot	itself	fly	to	heaven.	It	just	crows.	A	man	may
count	on	mere	words	to	awaken	faith.	This	may	succeed	now	and	then,	but	if	persisted	in,	it	will	have	bad
consequences.



62.	Hsiao	Kuo	/	Preponderance	of	the	Small

While	in	the	hexagram	Ta	Kuo,	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	(28),	the	strong	lines	preponderate
and	are	within,	inclosed	between	weak	lines	at	the	top	and	bottom,	the	present	hexagram	has	weak	lines
preponderating,	though	here	again	they	are	on	the	outside,	the	strong	lines	being	within.	This	indeed	is
the	basis	of	the	exceptional	situation	indicated	by	the	hexagram.	When	strong	lines	are	outside,	we	have
the	hexagram	I,	PROVIDING	NOURISHMENT	(27),	or	Chung	Fu,	INNER	TRUTH	(61);	neither	represents
an	exceptional	state.	When	strong	elements	within	preponderate,	they	necessarily	enforce	their	will.	This
creates	 struggle	 and	 exceptional	 conditions	 in	 general.	 But	 in	 the	 present	 hexagram	 it	 is	 the	 weak
element	that	perforce	must	mediate	with	the	outside	world.	If	a	man	occupies	a	position	of	authority	for
which	he	is	by	nature	really	inadequate,	extraordinary	prudence	is	necessary.

THE	JUDGMENT
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.	Success.
Perseverance	furthers.
Small	things	may	be	done;	great	things	should	not	be	done.
The	flying	bird	brings	the	message:
It	is	not	well	to	strive	upward,
It	is	well	to	remain	below.
Great	good	fortune.

Exceptional	modesty	and	conscientiousness	are	sure	to	be	rewarded	with	success;	however,	if	a	man	is
not	to	throw	himself	away,	it	is	important	that	they	should	not	become	empty	form	and	subservience	but
be	combined	always	with	a	correct	dignity	in	personal	behavior.	We	must	understand	the	demands	of	the
time	in	order	to	find	the	necessary	offset	for	its	deficiencies	and	damages.	In	any	event	we	must	not	count
on	great	success,	since	the	requisite	strength	is	lacking.	In	this	lies	the	importance	of	the	message	that
one	should	not	strive	after	lofty	things	but	hold	to	lowly	things.

The	structure	of	the	hexagram	gives	rise	to	the	idea	that	this	message	is	brought	by	a	bird.	In	Ta	Kuo,
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	(28),	the	four	strong,	heavy	lines	within,	supported	only	by	two	weak
lines	without,	give	the	image	of	a	sagging	ridgepole.	Here	the	supporting	weak	lines	are	both	outside	and
preponderant;	this	gives	the	image	of	a	soaring	bird.	But	a	bird	should	not	try	to	surpass	itself	and	fly	into
the	sun;	it	should	descend	to	the	earth,	where	its	nest	is.	In	this	way	it	gives	the	message	conveyed	by	the
hexagram.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE
SMALL.
Thus	in	his	conduct	the	superior	man	gives	preponderance	to	reverence.
In	bereavement	he	gives	preponderance	to	grief.
In	his	expenditures	he	gives	preponderance	to	thrift.

Thunder	on	the	mountain	is	different	from	thunder	on	the	plain.	In	the	mountains,	thunder	seems	much
nearer;	outside	the	mountains,	it	is	less	audible	than	the	thunder	of	an	ordinary	storm.	Thus	the	superior
man	derives	an	imperative	from	this	image:	he	must	always	fix	his	eyes	more	closely	and	more	directly	on
duty	 than	does	 the	ordinary	man,	even	 though	 this	might	make	his	behavior	 seem	petty	 to	 the	outside
world.	He	is	exceptionally	conscientious	in	his	actions.	In	bereavement	emotion	means	more	to	him	than
ceremoniousness.	 In	 all	 his	 personal	 expenditures	 he	 is	 extremely	 simple	 and	 unpretentious.	 In
comparison	with	 the	man	of	 the	masses,	 all	 this	makes	him	stand	out	as	exceptional.	But	 the	essential
significance	of	his	attitude	lies	in	the	fact	that	in	external	matters	he	is	on	the	side	of	the	lowly.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
The	bird	meets	with	misfortune	through	flying.

A	bird	ought	to	remain	in	the	nest	until	it	is	fledged.	If	it	tries	to	fly	before	this,	it	invites	misfortune.
Extraordinary	measures	should	be	resorted	 to	only	when	all	else	 fails.	At	 first	we	ought	 to	put	up	with
traditional	 ways	 as	 long	 as	 possible;	 otherwise	we	 exhaust	 ourselves	 and	 our	 energy	 and	 still	 achieve
nothing.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
She	passes	by	her	ancestor
And	meets	her	ancestress.
He	does	not	reach	his	prince
And	meets	the	official.
No	blame.

Two	 exceptional	 situations	 are	 instanced	 here.	 In	 the	 temple	 of	 ancestors,	 where	 alternation	 of
generations	prevails,	the	grandson	stands	on	the	same	side	as	the	grandfather.	Hence	his	closest	relations
are	with	the	grandfather.	The	present	line	designates	the	grandson’s	wife,	who	during	the	sacrifice	passes



by	the	ancestor	and	goes	toward	the	ancestress.	This	unusual	behavior	is,	however,	an	expression	of	her
modesty.	She	ventures	 rather	 to	approach	 the	ancestress,	 for	 she	 feels	 related	 to	her	by	 their	common
sex.	Hence	here	deviation	from	the	rule	is	not	a	mistake.

Another	image	is	that	of	the	official	who,	 in	compliance	with	regulation,	first	seeks	an	audience	with
his	prince.	If	he	is	not	successful	in	this,	he	does	not	try	to	force	anything	but	goes	about	conscientious
fulfillment	of	his	duty,	taking	his	place	among	the	other	officials.	This	extraordinary	restraint	is	likewise
not	a	mistake	in	exceptional	times.	(The	rule	is	that	every	official	should	first	have	an	audience	with	the
prince	by	whom	he	is	appointed.	Here	the	appointment	is	made	by	the	minister.)

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
If	one	is	not	extremely	careful,
Somebody	may	come	up	from	behind	and	strike	him.
Misfortune.

At	certain	times	extraordinary	caution	is	absolutely	necessary.	But	it	is	just	in	such	life	situations	that
we	find	upright	and	strong	personalities	who,	conscious	of	being	in	the	right,	disdain	to	hold	themselves
on	guard,	because	they	consider	it	petty.	Instead,	they	go	their	way	proud	and	unconcerned.	But	this	self-
confidence	deludes	them.	There	are	dangers	 lurking	for	which	they	are	unprepared.	Yet	such	danger	 is
not	unavoidable;	one	can	escape	it	if	he	understands	that	the	time	demands	that	he	pay	especial	attention
to	small	and	insignificant	things.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
No	blame.	He	meets	him	without	passing	by.
Going	brings	danger.	One	must	be	on	guard.
Do	not	act.	Be	constantly	persevering.

Hardness	of	character	is	tempered	by	yielding	position,1	so	that	no	mistakes	are	made.	The	situation
here	calls	for	extreme	caution;	one	must	make	no	attempt	of	one’s	own	initiative	to	reach	the	desired	end.
And	if	one	were	to	go	on,	endeavoring	to	force	his	way	to	the	goal,	he	would	be	endangered.	Therefore
one	must	be	on	guard	and	not	act	but	continue	inwardly	to	persevere.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Dense	clouds,
No	rain	from	our	western	territory.
The	prince	shoots	and	hits	him	who	is	in	the	cave.

As	a	high	place	is	pictured	here,	the	image	of	a	flying	bird	has	become	that	of	flying	clouds.	But	dense
as	the	clouds	are,	they	race	across	the	sky	and	give	no	rain.	Similarly,	in	exceptional	times	there	may	be	a
born	ruler	who	is	qualified	to	set	the	world	in	order,	but	who	cannot	achieve	anything	or	confer	blessing
on	the	people	because	he	stands	alone	and	has	no	helpers.	 In	such	times	a	man	must	seek	out	helpers
with	whose	aid	he	can	carry	out	the	task.	But	these	helpers	must	be	modestly	sought	out	in	the	retirement
to	which	they	have	withdrawn.	It	is	not	their	fame	nor	their	great	names	but	their	genuine	achievements
that	are	important.	Through	such	modesty	the	right	man	is	found,	and	the	exceptional	task	is	carried	out
in	spite	of	all	difficulties.

Six	at	the	top	means:
He	passes	him	by,	not	meeting	him.
The	flying	bird	leaves	him.
Misfortune.
This	means	bad	luck	and	injury.

If	 one	overshoots	 the	goal,	 one	 cannot	hit	 it.	 If	 a	bird	will	 not	 come	 to	 its	 nest	 but	 flies	higher	 and
higher,	it	eventually	falls	into	the	hunter’s	net.	He	who	in	times	of	extraordinary	salience	of	small	things
does	not	know	how	to	call	a	halt,	but	restlessly	seeks	to	press	on	and	on,	draws	upon	himself	misfortune
at	the	hands	of	gods	and	men,	because	he	deviates	from	the	order	of	nature.



63.	Chi	Chi	/	After	Completion

This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 evolution	 of	 T’ai,	 PEACE	 (11).	 The	 transition	 from	 confusion	 to	 order	 is
completed,	and	everything	 is	 in	 its	proper	place	even	 in	particulars.	The	 strong	 lines	are	 in	 the	 strong
places,	the	weak	lines	in	the	weak	places.	This	is	a	very	favorable	outlook,	yet	it	gives	reason	for	thought.
For	it	is	just	when	perfect	equilibrium	has	been	reached	that	any	movement	may	cause	order	to	revert	to
disorder.	 The	 one	 strong	 line	 that	 has	 moved	 to	 the	 top,	 thus	 effecting	 complete	 order	 in	 details,	 is
followed	by	the	other	lines,	each	moving	according	to	its	nature,	and	thus	suddenly	there	arises	again	the
hexagram	P’i,	STANDSTILL	(12).

Hence	the	present	hexagram	indicates	the	conditions	of	a	time	of	climax,	which	necessitate	the	utmost
caution.

THE	JUDGMENT
AFTER	COMPLETION.	Success	in	small	matters.
Perseverance	furthers.
At	the	beginning	good	fortune,
At	the	end	disorder.

The	 transition	 from	 the	old	 to	 the	new	 time	 is	already	accomplished.	 In	principle,	everything	stands
systematized,	and	it	is	only	in	regard	to	details	that	success	is	still	to	be	achieved.

In	respect	to	this,	however,	we	must	be	careful	to	maintain	the	right	attitude.	Everything	proceeds	as	if
of	 its	own	accord,	and	 this	can	all	 too	easily	 tempt	us	 to	 relax	and	 let	 things	 take	 their	course	without
troubling	over	details.	Such	 indifference	 is	 the	 root	of	all	evil.	Symptoms	of	decay	are	bound	 to	be	 the
result.	Here	we	have	the	rule	indicating	the	usual	course	of	history.	But	this	rule	is	not	an	inescapable	law.
He	who	understands	it	is	in	position	to	avoid	its	effects	by	dint	of	unremitting	perseverance	and	caution.

THE	IMAGE
Water	over	fire:	the	image	of	the	condition
In	AFTER	COMPLETION.
Thus	the	superior	man
Takes	thought	of	misfortune
And	arms	himself	against	it	in	advance.

When	water	in	a	kettle	hangs	over	fire,	the	two	elements	stand	in	relation	and	thus	generate	energy
(cf.	the	production	of	steam).	But	the	resulting	tension	demands	caution.	If	the	water	boils	over,	the	fire	is
extinguished	 and	 its	 energy	 is	 lost.	 If	 the	 heat	 is	 too	 great,	 the	 water	 evaporates	 into	 the	 air.	 These
elements	here	brought	into	relation	and	thus	generating	energy	are	by	nature	hostile	to	each	other.	Only
the	 most	 extreme	 caution	 can	 prevent	 damage.	 In	 life	 too	 there	 are	 junctures	 when	 all	 forces	 are	 in
balance	and	work	in	harmony,	so	that	everything	seems	to	be	in	the	best	of	order.	In	such	times	only	the
sage	 recognizes	 the	 moments	 that	 bode	 danger	 and	 knows	 how	 to	 banish	 it	 by	 means	 of	 timely
precautions.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
He	brakes	his	wheels.
He	gets	his	tail	in	the	water.
No	blame.

In	 times	 following	 a	 great	 transition,	 everything	 is	 pressing	 forward,	 striving	 in	 the	 direction	 of
development	and	progress.	But	this	pressing	forward	at	the	beginning	is	not	good;	it	overshoots	the	mark
and	leads	with	certainty	to	loss	and	collapse.	Therefore	a	man	of	strong	character	does	not	allow	himself
to	 be	 infected	 by	 the	 general	 intoxication	 but	 checks	 his	 course	 in	 time.	 He	 may	 indeed	 not	 remain
altogether	 untouched	 by	 the	 disastrous	 consequences	 of	 the	 general	 pressure,	 but	 he	 is	 hit	 only	 from
behind	like	a	fox	that,	having	crossed	the	water,	at	the	last	minute	gets	its	tail	wet.	He	will	not	suffer	any
real	harm,	because	his	behavior	has	been	correct.

Six	in	the	second	place	means:
The	woman	loses	the	curtain	of	her	carriage.
Do	not	run	after	it;
On	the	seventh	day	you	will	get	it.

When	 a	 woman	 drove	 out	 in	 her	 carriage,	 she	 had	 a	 curtain	 that	 hid	 her	 from	 the	 glances	 of	 the
curious.	It	was	regarded	as	a	breach	of	propriety	to	drive	on	if	this	curtain	was	lost.	Applied	to	public	life,
this	means	that	a	man	who	wants	to	achieve	something	is	not	receiving	that	confidence	of	the	authorities
which	he	 needs,	 so	 to	 speak,	 for	 his	 personal	 protection.	Especially	 in	 times	 “after	 completion”	 it	may
happen	 that	 those	 who	 have	 come	 to	 power	 grow	 arrogant	 and	 conceited	 and	 no	 longer	 trouble
themselves	about	fostering	new	talent.

This	as	a	rule	results	in	office	seeking.	If	a	man’s	superiors	withhold	their	trust	from	him,	he	will	seek
ways	 and	 means	 of	 getting	 it	 and	 of	 drawing	 attention	 to	 himself.	 We	 are	 warned	 against	 such	 an
unworthy	procedure:	“Do	not	seek	it.”	Do	not	throw	yourself	away	on	the	world,	but	wait	tranquilly	and
develop	 your	personal	worth	by	 your	 own	efforts.	 Times	 change.	When	 the	 six	 stages	 of	 the	hexagram



have	passed,	the	new	era	dawns.	That	which	is	a	man’s	own	cannot	be	permanently	lost.	It	comes	to	him
of	its	own	accord.	He	need	only	be	able	to	wait.

Nine	in	the	third	place	means:
The	Illustrious	Ancestor
Disciplines	the	Devil’s	Country.
After	three	years	he	conquers	it.
Inferior	people	must	not	be	employed.

“Illustrious	Ancestor”	is	the	dynastic	title	of	the	Emperor	Wu	Ting	of	the	Yin	dynasty.1	After	putting	his
realm	 in	 order	 with	 a	 strong	 hand,	 he	 waged	 long	 colonial	 wars	 for	 the	 subjection	 of	 the	 Huns	 who
occupied	the	northern	borderland	with	constant	threat	of	incursions.

The	 situation	 described	 is	 as	 follows.	 After	 times	 of	 completion,	when	 a	 new	 power	 has	 arisen	 and
everything	 within	 the	 country	 has	 been	 set	 in	 order,	 a	 period	 of	 colonial	 expansion	 almost	 inevitably
follows.	Then	as	a	rule	long-drawn-out	struggles	must	be	reckoned	with.	For	this	reason,	a	correct	colonial
policy	is	especially	important.	The	territory	won	at	such	bitter	cost	must	not	be	regarded	as	an	almshouse
for	people	who	in	one	way	or	another	have	made	themselves	impossible	at	home,	but	who	are	thought	to
be	quite	good	enough	for	the	colonies.	Such	a	policy	ruins	at	the	outset	any	chance	of	success.	This	holds
true	in	small	as	well	as	in	large	matters,	because	it	is	not	only	rising	states	that	carry	on	a	colonial	policy;
the	urge	to	expand,	with	its	accompanying	dangers,	is	part	and	parcel	of	every	ambitious	undertaking.

Six	in	the	fourth	place	means:
The	finest	clothes	turn	to	rags.
Be	careful	all	day	long.

In	 a	 time	of	 flowering	 culture,	 an	occasional	 convulsion	 is	 bound	 to	 occur,	 uncovering	a	hidden	evil
within	 society	and	at	 first	 causing	a	great	 sensation.	But	 since	 the	 situation	 is	 favorable	on	 the	whole,
such	 evils	 can	 easily	 be	 glossed	 over	 and	 concealed	 from	 the	 public.	 Then	 everything	 is	 forgotten	 and
peace	apparently	reigns	complacently	once	more.	However,	to	the	thoughtful	man	such	occurrences	are
grave	omens	that	he	does	not	neglect.	This	is	the	only	way	of	averting	evil	consequences.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:
The	neighbor	in	the	east	who	slaughters	an	ox
Does	not	attain	as	much	real	happiness
As	the	neighbor	in	the	west
With	his	small	offering.

Religious	 attitudes	 are	 likewise	 influenced	 by	 the	 spiritual	 atmosphere	 prevailing	 in	 times	 after
completion.	In	divine	worship	the	simple	old	forms	are	replaced	by	an	ever	more	elaborate	ritual	and	an
ever	 greater	 outward	 display.	 But	 inner	 seriousness	 is	 lacking	 in	 this	 show	 of	 magnificence;	 human
caprice	 takes	 the	place	of	 conscientious	obedience	 to	 the	divine	will.	However,	while	man	sees	what	 is
before	 his	 eyes,	 God	 looks	 into	 the	 heart.	 Therefore	 a	 simple	 sacrifice	 offered	with	 real	 piety	 holds	 a
greater	blessing	than	an	impressive	service	without	warmth.

Six	at	the	top	means:
He	gets	his	head	in	the	water.	Danger.

Here	in	conclusion	another	warning	is	added.	After	crossing	a	stream,	a	man’s	head	can	get	into	the
water	only	if	he	is	so	imprudent	as	to	turn	back.	As	long	as	he	goes	forward	and	does	not	look	back,	he
escapes	 this	 danger.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 fascination	 in	 standing	 still	 and	 looking	 back	 on	 a	 peril	 overcome.
However,	 such	 vain	 self-admiration	 brings	 misfortune.	 It	 leads	 only	 to	 danger,	 and	 unless	 one	 finally
resolves	to	go	forward	without	pausing,	one	falls	a	victim	to	this	danger.



64.	Wei	Chi	/	Before	Completion

This	hexagram	indicates	a	time	when	the	transition	from	disorder	to	order	 is	not	yet	completed.	The
change	 is	 indeed	 prepared	 for,	 since	 all	 the	 lines	 in	 the	 upper	 trigram	 are	 in	 relation	 to	 those	 in	 the
lower.1	 However,	 they	 are	 not	 yet	 in	 their	 places.	While	 the	 preceding	 hexagram	 offers	 an	 analogy	 to
autumn,	which	forms	the	transition	from	summer	to	winter,	this	hexagram	presents	a	parallel	to	spring,
which	leads	out	of	winter’s	stagnation	into	the	fruitful	time	of	summer.	With	this	hopeful	outlook	the	Book
of	Changes	comes	to	its	close.

THE	JUDGMENT
BEFORE	COMPLETION.	Success.
But	if	the	little	fox,	after	nearly	completing	the	crossing,
Gets	his	tail	in	the	water,
There	is	nothing	that	would	further.

The	conditions	are	difficult.	The	task	 is	great	and	full	of	responsibility.	 It	 is	nothing	 less	than	that	of
leading	the	world	out	of	confusion	back	to	order.	But	it	is	a	task	that	promises	success,	because	there	is	a
goal	that	can	unite	the	forces	now	tending	in	different	directions.	At	first,	however,	one	must	move	warily,
like	an	old	fox	walking	over	ice.	The	caution	of	a	fox	walking	over	ice	is	proverbial	in	China.	His	ears	are
constantly	alert	to	the	cracking	of	the	ice,	as	he	carefully	and	circumspectly	searches	out	the	safest	spots.
A	young	fox	who	as	yet	has	not	acquired	this	caution	goes	ahead	boldly,	and	it	may	happen	that	he	falls	in
and	gets	his	tail	wet	when	he	is	almost	across	the	water.	Then	of	course	his	effort	has	been	all	 in	vain.
Accordingly,	in	times	“before	completion,”	deliberation	and	caution	are	the	prerequisites	of	success.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	over	water:
The	image	of	the	condition	before	transition.
Thus	the	superior	man	is	careful
In	the	differentiation	of	things,
So	that	each	finds	its	place.

When	fire,	which	by	nature	flames	upward,	is	above,	and	water,	which	flows	downward,	is	below,	their
effects	 take	 opposite	 directions	 and	 remain	 unrelated.	 If	 we	 wish	 to	 achieve	 an	 effect,	 we	 must	 first
investigate	 the	nature	of	 the	 forces	 in	question	and	ascertain	 their	proper	place.	 If	we	can	bring	 these
forces	to	bear	in	the	right	place,	they	will	have	the	desired	effect,	and	completion	will	be	achieved.	But	in
order	to	handle	external	forces	properly,	we	must	above	all	arrive	at	the	correct	standpoint	ourselves,	for
only	from	this	vantage	can	we	work	correctly.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning	means:
He	gets	his	tail	in	the	water.
Humiliating.

In	 times	 of	 disorder	 there	 is	 a	 temptation	 to	 advance	 oneself	 as	 rapidly	 as	 possible	 in	 order	 to
accomplish	something	tangible.	But	this	enthusiasm	leads	only	to	 failure	and	humiliation	 if	 the	time	for
achievement	has	not	yet	arrived.	In	such	a	time	it	is	wise	to	spare	ourselves	the	opprobrium	of	failure	by
holding	back.2

Nine	in	the	second	place	means:
He	brakes	his	wheels.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.

Here	again	the	time	to	act	has	not	yet	come.	But	the	patience	needed	is	not	that	of	idle	waiting	without
thought	of	the	morrow.	Kept	up	indefinitely,	this	would	not	lead	to	any	success.	Instead,	an	individual	must
develop	in	himself	the	strength	that	will	enable	him	to	go	forward.	He	must	have	a	vehicle,	as	it	were,	to
effect	the	crossing.	But	he	must	for	the	time	being	use	the	brakes.	Patience	in	the	highest	sense	means
putting	brakes	on	 strength.	Therefore	he	must	not	 fall	 asleep	and	 lose	 sight	 of	 the	goal.	 If	 he	 remains
strong	and	steadfast	in	his	resolve,	all	goes	well	in	the	end.

Six	in	the	third	place	means:
Before	completion,	attack	brings	misfortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.

The	time	of	transition	has	arrived,	but	one	lacks	the	strength	to	complete	the	transition.	If	one	should
attempt	 to	 force	 it,	 disaster	 would	 result,	 because	 collapse	 would	 then	 be	 unavoidable.	What	 is	 to	 be
done?	 A	 new	 situation	 must	 be	 created;	 one	 must	 engage	 the	 energies	 of	 able	 helpers	 and	 in	 this
fellowship	take	the	decisive	step—cross	the	great	water.	Then	completion	will	become	possible.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
Shock,	thus	to	discipline	the	Devil’s	Country.
For	three	years,	great	realms	are	awarded.



Now	it	 is	 the	time	of	struggle.	The	transition	must	be	completed.	We	must	make	ourselves	strong	 in
resolution;	this	brings	good	fortune.	All	misgivings	that	might	arise	in	such	grave	times	of	struggle	must
be	silenced.	It	is	a	question	of	a	fierce	battle	to	break	and	to	discipline	the	Devil’s	Country,	the	forces	of
decadence.	 But	 the	 struggle	 also	 has	 its	 reward.	Now	 is	 the	 time	 to	 lay	 the	 foundations	 of	 power	 and
mastery	for	the	future.

Six	in	the	fifth	place	means:
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
No	remorse.
The	light	of	the	superior	man	is	true.
Good	fortune.

The	victory	has	been	won.	The	power	of	steadfastness	has	not	been	routed.	Everything	has	gone	well.
All	misgivings	 have	 been	 overcome.	 Success	 has	 justified	 the	 deed.	 The	 light	 of	 a	 superior	 personality
shines	 forth	anew	and	makes	 its	 influence	felt	among	men	who	have	faith	 in	 it	and	rally	around	 it.	The
new	time	has	arrived,	and	with	it	good	fortune.	And	just	as	the	sun	shines	forth	in	redoubled	beauty	after
rain,	or	as	a	forest	grows	more	freshly	green	from	charred	ruins	after	a	fire,	so	the	new	era	appears	all
the	more	glorious	by	contrast	with	the	misery	of	the	old.

Nine	at	the	top	means:
There	is	drinking	of	wine
In	genuine	confidence.	No	blame.
But	if	one	wets	his	head,
He	loses	it,	in	truth.

Before	 completion,	 at	 the	 dawning	 of	 the	 new	 time,	 friends	 foregather	 in	 an	 atmosphere	 of	mutual
trust,	and	the	time	of	waiting	is	passed	in	conviviality.	Since	the	new	era	is	hard	on	the	threshold,	there	is
no	blame	in	this.	But	one	must	be	careful	in	all	this	to	keep	within	proper	bounds.	If	in	his	exuberance	a
man	gets	drunk,	he	forfeits	the	favorableness	of	the	situation	through	his	intemperance.
NOTE.	The	hexagram	AFTER	COMPLETION	represents	a	gradual	transition	from	a	time	of	ascent	past

a	peak	of	 culture	 to	a	 time	of	 standstill.	 The	hexagram	BEFORE	COMPLETION	represents	a	 transition
from	chaos	to	order.	This	hexagram	comes	at	 the	end	of	 the	Book	of	Changes.	 It	points	to	the	fact	that
every	end	contains	a	new	beginning.	Thus	 it	gives	hope	 to	men.	The	Book	of	Changes	 is	a	book	of	 the
future.



BOOK	II:
THE	MATERIAL



Shuo	Koa	/	Discussion	of	the	Trigrams1
CHAPTER	I

1.	In	ancient	times	the	holy	sages	made	the	Book	of	Changes	thus:
They	invented	the	yarrow-stalk	oracle	in	order	to	lend	aid	in	a	mysterious	way	to	the	light	of	the

gods.	 To	 heaven	 they	 assigned	 the	 number	 three	 and	 to	 earth	 the	 number	 two;	 from	 these	 they
computed	the	other	numbers.

They	 contemplated	 the	 changes	 in	 the	 dark	 and	 the	 light	 and	 established	 the	 hexagrams	 in
accordance	 with	 them.	 They	 brought	 about	 movements	 in	 the	 firm	 and	 the	 yielding,	 and	 thus
produced	the	individual	lines.

			They	put	themselves	in	accord	with	tao	and	its	power,	and	in	conformity	with	this	laid	down	the
order	of	what	is	right.	By	thinking	through	the	order	of	the	outer	world	to	the	end,	and	by	exploring
the	law	of	their	nature	to	the	deepest	core,	they	arrived	at	an	understanding	of	fate.

This	 first	 section	 refers	 to	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 as	 a	 whole	 and	 to	 the	 fundamental	 principles
underlying	it.	The	original	purpose	of	the	hexagrams	was	to	consult	destiny.	As	divine	beings	do	not	give
direct	 expression	 to	 their	 knowledge,	 a	means	 had	 to	 be	 found	 by	which	 they	 could	make	 themselves
intelligible.	Suprahuman	intelligence	has	from	the	beginning	made	use	of	three	mediums	of	expression—
men,	animals,	and	plants,	in	each	of	which	life	pulsates	in	a	different	rhythm.	Chance	came	to	be	utilized
as	a	fourth	medium;	the	very	absence	of	an	immediate	meaning	in	chance	permitted	a	deeper	meaning	to
come	 to	 expression	 in	 it.	 The	 oracle	 was	 the	 outcome	 of	 this	 use	 of	 chance.	 The	 Book	 of	 Changes	 is
founded	on	the	plant	oracle	as	manipulated	by	men	with	mediumistic	powers.

The	 established	 language	 for	 communication	with	 suprahuman	 intelligences	was	 based	 on	 numbers
and	 their	 symbolism.	The	 fundamental	 principles	 of	 the	world	 are	heaven	and	earth,	 spirit	 and	matter.
Earth	is	the	derived	principle;	therefore	the	number	two	is	assigned	to	it.	Heaven	is	the	ultimate	unity;	yet
it	includes	the	earth	within	itself,	and	is	therefore	assigned	the	number	three.	The	number	one	could	not
be	used,	as	it	 is	too	abstract	and	rigid	and	does	not	include	the	idea	of	the	manifold.	Following	out	this
conception,	the	uneven	numbers	were	assigned	to	the	world	of	heaven,	the	even	numbers	to	the	world	of
earth.

The	hexagrams,	consisting	of	six	lines	each,	are,	so	to	speak,	representations	of	actual	conditions	in	the
world,	and	of	the	combinations	of	the	light-giving,	heavenly	power	and	the	dark,	earthly	power	that	occur
in	these	situations.	Within	the	hexagrams,	however,	it	is	always	possible	for	the	individual	lines	to	change
and	regroup	themselves;	just	as	world	situations	continually	change	and	reconstitute	themselves,	so	out	of
each	hexagram	there	arises	a	new	one.	The	process	of	change	is	to	be	observed	in	the	lines	that	move,
and	the	end	result	in	the	new	hexagram	thus	formed.

In	addition	to	its	use	as	an	oracle,	the	Book	of	Changes	also	serves	to	further	intuitive	understanding	of
conditions	 in	 the	world,	 penetration	 to	 the	 uttermost	 depths	 of	 nature	 and	 spirit.	 The	 hexagrams	 give
complete	images	of	conditions	and	relationships	existing	in	the	world;	the	individual	lines	treat	particular
situations	as	 they	change	within	these	general	conditions.	The	Book	of	Changes	 is	 in	harmony	with	tao
and	its	power	(natural	law	and	moral	law).	Therefore	it	can	lay	down	the	rules	of	what	is	right	for	each
person.	The	ultimate	meaning	of	 the	world—fate,	 the	world	 as	 it	 is,	 how	 it	 has	 come	 to	be	 so	 through
creative	decision	(ming)—can	be	apprehended	by	going	down	to	the	ultimate	sources	in	the	world	of	outer
experience	and	of	inner	experience.	Both	paths	lead	to	the	same	goal.	(Cf.	the	first	chapter	of	Lao-tse.)

2.	In	ancient	times	the	holy	sages	made	the	Book	of	Changes	thus:
Their	purpose	was	to	follow	the	order	of	their	nature	and	of	fate.	Therefore	they	determined	the

tao	of	heaven	and	called	it	the	dark	and	the	light.	They	determined	the	tao	of	the	earth	and	called	it
the	 yielding	 and	 the	 firm.	 They	 determined	 the	 tao	 of	man	 and	 called	 it	 love2	 and	 rectitude.	 They
combined	these	three	fundamental	powers	and	doubled	them;	therefore	in	the	Book	of	Changes	a	sign
is	always	formed	by	six	lines.

	 	 	The	places	are	divided	into	the	dark	and	the	light.	The	yielding	and	the	firm	occupy	these	by
turns.	Therefore	the	Book	of	Changes	has	six	places,	which	constitute	the	linear	figures.

This	 section	 deals	 with	 the	 elements	 of	 the	 individual	 hexagrams	 and	 their	 interrelation	 with	 the
cosmic	process.	Just	as	in	the	heavens,	evening	and	morning	make	a	day	through	the	alternation	of	dark
and	 light	 (yin	 and	 yang),	 so	 the	 alternating	 even	 and	uneven	places	 in	 the	hexagrams	are	 respectively
designated	as	dark	and	light.	The	first,	third,	and	fifth	places	are	light;	the	second,	fourth,	and	sixth	are
dark.	Furthermore,	 just	as	on	earth	all	beings	are	 formed	 from	both	 firm	and	yielding	elements,	so	 the
individual	lines	are	firm,	i.e.,	undivided,	or	yielding,	i.e.,	divided.	In	correspondence	with	these	two	basic
powers	in	heaven	and	on	earth,	there	exist	in	man	the	polarities	of	love	and	rectitude—love	being	related
to	 the	 light	 principle	 and	 rectitude	 to	 the	 dark.	 These	 human	 attributes,	 because	 they	 belong	 to	 the
category	of	the	subjective,	not	of	the	objective,	are	not	represented	specifically	in	the	places	and	lines	of
the	hexagrams.	The	 trinity	of	world	principles,	however,	does	come	to	expression	 in	 the	hexagram	as	a
whole	 and	 in	 its	 parts.	 These	 three	 principles	 are	 differentiated	 as	 subject	 (man),	 object	 having	 form
(earth),	and	content	(heaven).	The	lowest	place	in	the	trigram	is	that	of	earth;	the	middle	place	belongs	to
man	 and	 the	 top	 place	 to	 heaven.	 In	 correspondence	with	 the	 principle	 of	 duality	 in	 the	 universe,	 the
original	three-line	signs	are	doubled;	thus	in	the	hexagrams	there	are	two	places	each	for	earth,	for	man,
and	for	heaven.	The	two	lowest	places	are	those	of	the	earth,	the	third	and	fourth	are	those	of	man,	and
the	two	at	the	top	are	those	of	heaven.

A	 fully	 rounded	 concept	 of	 the	 universe	 is	 expressed	 here,	 directly	 related	 to	 that	 expressed	 in	 the
Doctrine	of	the	Mean.3

All	 the	 ideas	 set	 forth	 in	 this	 first	 chapter	 link	 it	 to	 the	 collection	 of	 essays	 on	 the	 meaning	 and
structure	 of	 the	 hexagrams	 called	 the	Appended	 Judgments,4	 and	 are	 not	 connected	with	what	 follows



here.
CHAPTER	II

3.	Heaven	and	earth	determine	the	direction.	The	forces	of	mountain	and	lake	are	united.	Thunder
and	wind	arouse	each	other.	Water	and	 fire	do	not	 combat	each	other.	Thus	are	 the	eight	 trigrams
intermingled.

Counting	that	which	is	going	into	the	past	depends	on	the	forward	movement.	Knowing	that	which
is	 to	 come	 depends	 on	 the	 backward	movement.	 This	 is	 why	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 has	 backward-
moving	numbers.

Here,	in	what	is	probably	a	very	ancient	saying,	the	eight	primary	trigrams	are	named	in	a	sequence	of
pairs	that,	according	to	tradition,	goes	back	to	Fu	Hsi—that	 is	to	say,	 it	was	already	 in	existence	at	 the
time	 of	 the	 compilation	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 under	 the	 Chou	 dynasty.	 It	 is	 called	 the	 Sequence	 of
Earlier	 Heaven,	 or	 the	 Primal	 Arrangement.1	 The	 different	 trigrams	 are	 correlated	 with	 the	 cardinal
points,	as	shown	in	the	accompanying	diagram	[fig.	1].	(It	is	to	be	noted	that	the	Chinese	place	south	at
the	top.)

Fig.	1.	Sequence	of	Earlier	Heaven,	or	Primal	Arrangement
Ch’ien,	 heaven,	 and	 K’un,	 earth,	 determine	 the	 north-south	 axis.	 Then	 follows	 the	 axis	 Kên-Tui,

mountain	and	lake.	Their	forces	are	interrelated	in	that	the	wind	blows	from	the	mountain	to	the	lake,	and
the	clouds	and	mists	rise	from	the	lake	to	the	mountain.	Chên,	thunder,	and	Sun,	wind,	strengthen	each
other	when	they	appear.	Li,	fire,	and	K’an,	water,	are	irreconcilable	opposites	in	the	phenomenal	world.	In
the	primal	relationships,	however,	their	effects	do	not	conflict;	on	the	contrary,	they	balance	each	other.

When	 the	 trigrams	 intermingle,	 that	 is,	when	 they	are	 in	motion,	 a	double	movement	 is	 observable:
first,	 the	 usual	 clockwise	movement,	 cumulative	 and	 expanding	 as	 time	 goes	 on,	 and	 determining	 the
events	 that	 are	 passing;	 second,	 an	 opposite,	 backward	movement,	 folding	 up	 and	 contracting	 as	 time
goes	on,	through	which	the	seeds	of	the	future	take	form.	To	know	this	movement	is	to	know	the	future.	In
figurative	 terms,	 if	 we	 understand	 how	 a	 tree	 is	 contracted	 into	 a	 seed,	 we	 understand	 the	 future
unfolding	of	the	seed	into	a	tree.

4.	Thunder	brings	about	movement,	wind	brings	about	dispersion,	rain	brings	about	moisture,	the
sun	brings	about	warmth,	Keeping	Still	brings	about	standstill,	the	Joyous	brings	about	pleasure,	the
Creative	brings	about	rulership,	the	Receptive	brings	about	shelter.

Here	 again	 the	 forces	 for	 which	 the	 eight	 primary	 trigrams	 stand	 are	 presented	 in	 terms	 of	 their
effects	in	nature.	The	first	four	are	referred	to	by	their	images,	the	last	four	by	their	names,	because	only
the	first	four	indicate	in	their	images	natural	forces	at	work	throughout	time,	while	the	last	four	point	to
conditions	that	come	about	in	the	course	of	the	year.

Thus	we	have	first	a	forward-moving	(rising)	line,	in	which	the	forces	of	the	preceding	year	take	effect.
According	 to	 section	3,	 following	 this	 line	 leads	 to	 knowledge	of	 the	past,	which	 is	 present	 as	 a	 latent
cause	in	the	effects	it	produces.	In	the	second	group,	named	not	according	to	the	images	(phenomena)	but
according	to	the	attributes	of	the	trigrams,	a	backward	movement	sets	in	(a	jump	from	Li	in	the	east	back
to	Kên	in	the	northwest).	Along	this	line	the	forces	of	the	coming	year	develop,	and	following	it	leads	to
knowledge	 of	 the	 future,	 which	 is	 being	 prepared	 as	 an	 effect	 by	 its	 causes—like	 seeds	 that,	 in
contracting,	consolidate.

Within	 the	 Primal	 Arrangement	 the	 forces	 always	 take	 effect	 as	 pairs	 of	 opposites.	 Thunder,	 the
electrically	charged	force,	awakens	the	seeds	of	the	old	year.	Its	opposite,	the	wind,	dissolves	the	rigidity
of	 the	winter	 ice.	The	rain	moistens	the	seeds,	enabling	them	to	germinate,	while	 its	opposite,	 the	sun,
provides	the	necessary	warmth.	Hence	the	saying:	“Water	and	fire	do	not	combat	each	other.”	Then	come
the	backward-moving	forces.	Keeping	Still	stops	further	expansion;	germination	begins.	Its	opposite,	the
Joyous,	 brings	 about	 the	 joys	 of	 the	 harvest.	 Finally	 there	 come	 into	 play	 the	 directing	 forces—the
Creative,	representing	the	great	 law	of	existence,	and	the	Receptive,	representing	shelter	 in	the	womb,
into	which	everything	returns	after	completing	the	cycle	of	life.

As	 in	 the	course	of	 the	year,	so	 in	human	 life	we	 find	ascending	and	backward-moving	 lines	of	 force
from	which	the	present	and	the	future	can	be	deduced.

5.	God	comes	forth	in	the	sign	of	the	Arousing;	he	brings	all	things	to	completion	in	the	sign	of	the
Gentle;	he	causes	creatures	to	perceive	one	another	in	the	sign	of	the	Clinging	(light);	he	causes	them
to	 serve	 one	 another	 in	 the	 sign	 of	 the	Receptive.	He	 gives	 them	 joy	 in	 the	 sign	 of	 the	 Joyous;	 he
battles	in	the	sign	of	the	Creative;	he	toils	in	the	sign	of	the	Abysmal;	he	brings	them	to	perfection	in
the	sign	of	Keeping	Still.



Here	the	sequence	of	the	eight	trigrams	is	given	according	to	King	Wên’s	arrangement,	which	is	called
the	 Sequence	 of	 Later	 Heaven,	 or	 the	 Inner-World	 Arrangement.	 The	 trigrams	 are	 taken	 out	 of	 their
grouping	in	pairs	of	opposites	and	shown	in	the	temporal	progression	in	which	they	manifest	themselves
in	the	phenomenal	world	in	the	cycle	of	the	year.	Hereby	the	arrangement	of	the	trigrams	is	essentially
changed.	The	cardinal	points	and	the	seasons	are	correlated.	The	arrangement	is	represented	as	in	figure
2.

Fig.	2.	Sequence	of	Later	Heaven,	or	Inner-World	Arrangement
The	year	begins	to	show	the	creative	activity	of	God	in	the	trigram	Chên,	the	Arousing,	which	stands	in

the	 east	 and	 signifies	 the	 spring.	 The	 passage	 following	 explains	 more	 fully	 how	 this	 activity	 of	 God
proceeds	in	nature.

It	 is	highly	probable	that	section	5	represents	a	cryptic	saying	of	great	antiquity	that	 in	the	passage
below	has	received	an	interpretation	referable	no	doubt	to	the	Confucian	school	of	thought.

All	living	things	come	forth	in	the	sign	of	the	Arousing.	The	Arousing	stands	in	the	east.
They	come	to	completion	in	the	sign	of	the	Gentle.	The	Gentle	stands	in	the	southeast.	Completion

means	that	all	creatures	become	pure	and	perfect.
The	Clinging	is	the	brightness	in	which	all	creatures	perceive	one	another.	It	is	the	trigram	of	the

south.	That	the	holy	sages	turned	their	faces	to	the	south	while	they	gave	ear	to	the	meaning	of	the
universe	means	 that	 in	 ruling	 they	 turned	 toward	what	 is	 light.	 This	 they	 evidently	 took	 from	 this
trigram.

The	Receptive	means	the	earth.	It	takes	care	that	all	creatures	are	nourished.	Therefore	it	is	said:
“He	causes	them	to	serve	one	another	in	the	sign	of	the	Receptive.”

The	Joyous	is	midautumn,	which	rejoices	all	creatures.	Therefore	it	is	said:	“He	gives	them	joy	in
the	sign	of	the	Joyous.”

“He	battles	 in	 the	sign	of	 the	Creative.”	The	Creative	 is	 the	 trigram	of	 the	northwest.	 It	means
that	here	the	dark	and	the	light	arouse	each	other.

The	Abysmal	means	water.	It	is	the	trigram	of	due	north,	the	trigram	of	toil,	to	which	all	creatures
are	subject.	Therefore	it	is	said:	“He	toils	in	the	sign	of	the	Abysmal.”

Keeping	 Still	 is	 the	 trigram	 of	 the	 northeast,	 where	 beginning	 and	 end	 of	 all	 creatures	 are
completed.	Therefore	it	is	said:	“He	brings	them	to	perfection	in	the	sign	of	Keeping	Still.”

Here	 the	 course	 of	 the	 year	 and	 the	 course	 of	 the	 day	 are	 harmonized.	 What	 is	 pictured	 in	 the
foregoing	passage	as	the	unfolding	of	the	divine	is	here	shown	as	it	appears	in	nature.	The	trigrams	are
allotted	to	the	seasons	and	to	the	cardinal	points	without	schematization,	by	cursory	allusions	that	result
in	the	diagram	shown	in	figure	2.

Spring	 begins	 to	 stir	 and	 in	 nature	 there	 is	 germination	 and	 sprouting.	 This	 corresponds	 with	 the
morning	of	a	day.	This	awakening	belongs	 to	 the	 trigram	Chên,	 the	Arousing,	which	streams	out	of	 the
earth	as	thunder	and	electrical	energy.	Then	gentle	winds	blow,	renewing	the	plant	world	and	clothing	the
earth	in	green;	this	corresponds	with	the	trigram	Sun,	the	Gentle,	the	Penetrating.	Sun	has	for	its	image
both	wind,	which	melts	the	rigid	ice	of	winter,	and	wood,	which	develops	organically.	The	characteristic	of
this	 trigram	 is	 to	 make	 things	 flow	 into	 their	 forms,	 to	 make	 them	 develop	 and	 grow	 into	 the	 shape
prefigured	in	the	seed.

Then	comes	the	high	point	of	the	year,	midsummer,	or,	in	terms	of	the	day,	noontide.	Here	is	the	place
of	the	trigram	Li,	the	Clinging,	 light.	Creatures	now	perceive	one	another.	What	was	vegetative	organic
life	passes	over	into	psychic	consciousness.	Thus	we	have	likewise	an	image	of	human	society,	 in	which
the	ruler,	turned	to	the	light,	governs	the	world.	It	is	to	be	noted	that	the	trigram	Li	occupies	the	place	in
the	 south	 that	 in	 the	 Primal	 Arrangement	 is	 held	 by	 the	 trigram	 Ch’ien,	 the	 Creative.	 Li	 consists
essentially	of	the	top	and	bottom	lines	of	Ch’ien,	which	have	taken	to	themselves	the	middle	line	of	K’un.
To	 understand	 fully,	 one	 must	 always	 visualize	 the	 Inner-World	 Arrangement	 as	 transparent,	 with	 the
Primal	Arrangement	shining	through	it.	Thus	when	we	come	to	the	trigram	Li,	we	come	at	the	same	time
upon	the	ruler	Ch’ien,	who	governs	with	his	face	turned	to	the	south.

Thereupon	follows	the	ripening	of	the	fruits	of	the	field,	which	K’un,	the	earth,	the	Receptive,	bestows.
It	 is	 the	season	of	harvesting,	of	 joint	 labor.	Next,	as	evening	follows	day,	midautumn	follows	under	the
trigram	of	the	Joyous,	Tui,	which,	as	autumn,	leads	the	year	toward	its	fruition	and	joy.

Then	follows	the	stern	season,	when	proof	of	deeds	accomplished	must	be	forthcoming.	Judgment	is	in
the	air.	From	earth	our	thoughts	return	to	heaven,	to	Ch’ien,	the	Creative.	A	battle	is	being	fought,	for	it	is



just	when	 the	Creative	 is	 coming	 to	dominance	 that	 the	dark	yin	 force	 is	most	powerful	 in	 its	external
effects.	Hence	the	dark	and	the	light	now	arouse	each	other.	There	is	no	doubt	as	to	the	outcome	of	this
battle,	for	it	is	only	the	final	effect	of	pre-existing	causes	that	comes	to	judgment	through	the	Creative.

Now	winter	ensues,	in	the	trigram	K’an,	the	Abysmal.	K’an,	in	the	north—the	place	of	the	Receptive	in
the	Primal	Arrangement—is	symbolized	by	the	gorge.	Now	comes	the	toil	of	gathering	the	crops	into	the
barns.	Water	shuns	no	effort,	always	seeking	the	lowest	level,	so	that	everything	flows	to	it;	in	the	same
way,	winter	in	the	course	of	the	year,	and	midnight	in	the	course	of	the	day,	are	the	time	of	concentration.

The	 trigram	Keeping	Still,	whose	 symbol	 is	 the	mountain,	 is	of	mysterious	 significance.	Here,	 in	 the
seed,	 in	 the	deep-hidden	 stillness,	 the	 end	of	 every	 thing	 is	 joined	 to	 a	new	beginning.	Death	and	 life,
dying	and	resurrection—these	are	the	thoughts	awakened	by	the	transition	from	the	old	year	to	the	new.

Thus	 the	 cycle	 is	 closed.	 Like	 the	 day	 or	 the	 year	 in	 nature,	 so	 every	 life,	 indeed	 every	 cycle	 of
experience,	is	a	continuity	by	which	old	and	new	are	linked	together.	In	view	of	this	we	can	understand
why,	in	several	of	the	sixty-four	hexagrams,	the	southwest	represents	the	period	of	work	and	fellowship,
while	 the	 northeast	 stands	 for	 the	 time	 of	 solitude,	when	 the	 old	 is	 brought	 to	 an	 end	 and	 the	 new	 is
begun.

6.	The	spirit	is	mysterious	in	all	living	things	and	works	through	them.	Of	all	the	forces	that	move
things,	 there	 is	none	 swifter	 than	 thunder.	Of	 all	 the	 forces	 that	bend	 things,	 there	 is	none	 swifter
than	wind.	Of	all	 the	forces	that	warm	things,	there	 is	none	more	drying	than	fire.	Of	all	 the	forces
that	give	 joy	 to	 things,	 there	 is	none	more	gladdening	 than	 the	 lake.	Of	all	 the	 forces	 that	moisten
things,	there	is	none	more	moist	than	water.	Of	all	the	forces	that	end	and	begin	things,	there	is	none
more	glorious	than	keeping	still.

Therefore:	Water	and	 fire	complement	each	other,	 thunder	and	wind	do	not	 interfere	with	each
other,	 and	 the	 forces	 of	 mountain	 and	 lake	 are	 united	 in	 their	 action.	 Thus	 only	 are	 change	 and
transformation	possible,	and	thus	only	can	all	things	come	to	perfection.

Only	the	action	of	the	six	derived	trigrams	is	described	here.	It	is	the	action	of	the	spiritual,	which	is
not	a	thing	among	things,	but	the	force	that	manifests	its	existence	through	the	various	effects	of	thunder,
wind,	and	so	on.	The	two	primary	trigrams,	the	Creative	and	the	Receptive,	are	not	mentioned	because,	as
heaven	and	earth,	they	actually	are	those	emanations	of	the	spirit	within	which,	through	the	action	of	the
derived	 forces,	 the	 visible	world	 comes	 into	being	and	changes.	Each	of	 these	 forces	acts	 in	 a	definite
direction,	 but	movement	 and	 change	 come	 about	 only	 because	 the	 forces	 acting	 as	 pairs	 of	 opposites,
without	canceling	each	other,	set	going	the	cyclic	movement	on	which	the	life	of	the	world	depends.

CHAPTER	III
The	third	chapter	deals	with	the	eight	trigrams	separately	and	presents	the	symbols	with	which	they

are	associated.	It	is	important	inasmuch	as	the	words	of	the	text	on	the	individual	lines	in	each	hexagram
are	 very	 often	 to	 be	 explained	 against	 the	 background	 of	 these	 symbols.	 A	 knowledge	 of	 these
associations	is	important	as	a	tool	in	understanding	the	structure	of	the	Book	of	Changes.

7.	The	Attributes
The	Creative	is	strong.

The	Receptive	is	yielding.
The	Arousing	means	movement.
The	Gentle	is	penetrating.
The	Abysmal	is	dangerous.
The	Clinging	means	dependence.
Keeping	Still	means	standstill.
The	Joyous	means	pleasure.

8.	The	Symbolic	Animals
The	Creative	acts	in	the	horse,	the	Receptive	in	the	cow,	the	Arousing	in	the	dragon,	the	Gentle	in

the	cock,	the	Abysmal	in	the	pig,	the	Clinging	in	the	pheasant,	Keeping	Still	in	the	dog,	the	Joyous	in
the	sheep.

The	Creative	is	symbolized	by	the	horse,1	swift	and	tireless	as	it	runs,	and	the	Receptive	by	the	gentle
cow.	The	Arousing,	whose	image	is	thunder,	is	symbolized	by	the	dragon,	which,	rising	out	of	the	depths,
soars	up	to	the	stormy	sky—in	correspondence	with	the	single	strong	line	pushing	upward	below	the	two
yielding	 lines.	 The	 Gentle,	 the	 Penetrating,	 is	 symbolized	 by	 the	 cock,	 time’s	 watchman,	 whose	 voice
pierces	the	stillness—pervasive	as	the	wind,	the	image	of	the	Gentle.	Water	is	the	image	associated	with
the	Abysmal;	of	the	domestic	animals,	the	pig	is	the	one	that	lives	in	mud	and	water.	In	Li	as	its	trigram,
the	 Clinging,	 brightness,	 has	 originally	 the	 image	 of	 a	 pheasant-like	 firebird.	 The	 dog,	 the	 faithful
guardian,	 belongs	 to	Kên,	Keeping	Still.	 The	 Joyous	 is	 linked	with	 the	 sheep,	which	 is	 regarded	as	 the
animal	belonging	to	the	west;	the	two	parts	of	the	divided	line	at	the	top	are	the	horns	of	the	sheep.

9.	The	Parts	of	the	Body
The	Creative	manifests	itself	in	the	head,	the	Receptive	in	the	belly,	the	Arousing	in	the	foot,	the

Gentle	in	the	thighs,	the	Abysmal	in	the	ear,	the	Clinging	(brightness)	in	the	eye,	Keeping	Still	in	the
hand,	the	Joyous	in	the	mouth.

The	head	governs	the	entire	body.	The	belly	serves	 for	storing	up.	The	foot	steps	on	the	ground	and
moves;	the	hand	holds	fast.	The	thighs	under	their	covering	branch	downward;	the	mouth	in	plain	sight
opens	 upward.	 The	 ear	 is	 hollow	 outside;	 the	 eye	 is	 hollow	 inside.	 All	 these	 are	 pairs	 of	 opposites
corresponding	with	the	trigrams.

10.	The	Family	of	the	Primary	Trigrams
The	Creative	is	heaven,	therefore	it	is	called	the	father.	The	Receptive	is	the	earth,	therefore	it	is

called	the	mother.



In	the	trigram	of	the	Arousing	she	seeks	for	the	first	time	the	power	of	the	male	and	receives	a
son.	Therefore	the	Arousing	is	called	the	eldest	son.

In	the	trigram	of	the	Gentle	the	male	seeks	for	the	first	time	the	power	of	the	female	and	receives
a	daughter.	Therefore	the	Gentle	is	called	the	eldest	daughter.

In	the	Abysmal	she	seeks	for	a	second	time	and	receives	a	son.	Therefore	it	is	called	the	middle
son.

In	 the	 Clinging	 he	 seeks	 for	 a	 second	 time	 and	 receives	 a	 daughter.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 called	 the
middle	daughter.

In	Keeping	Still	she	seeks	for	a	third	time	and	receives	a	son.	Therefore	it	is	called	the	youngest
son.

In	 the	 Joyous	he	seeks	 for	a	 third	 time	and	receives	a	daughter.	Therefore	 it	 is	called	 the	 third
daughter.

In	the	sons,	according	to	this	derivation,	the	substance	comes	from	the	mother—hence	the	two	female
lines—while	the	dominant	or	determining	line	comes	from	the	father.	The	opposite	holds	in	the	case	of	the
daughters.	The	child	is	opposite	in	sex	to	the	parent	who	“seeks”	it.

Here	we	note	 a	 difference	between	 the	 Inner-World	Arrangement	 and	 the	Primal	Arrangement	with
respect	 to	 the	sex	of	 the	derived	trigrams.	 In	 the	Primal	Arrangement	 the	 lowest	 line	 is	always	the	sex

determinant	and	the	sons	are:	(1)	Chên,	the	Arousing	[ ];	(2)	Li,	the	Clinging	(the	sun)	[ ];
(3)	Tui,	the	Joyous	[ ].	In	the	arrangement	shown	in	the	diagram	[fig.	1]	they	stand	in	the	eastern

half.	The	daughters	are:	(1)	Sun,	the	Gentle	[ ];	(2)	K’an,	the	Abysmal	(the	moon)	[ ];	(3)

Kên,	Keeping	Still	[ ].	They	stand	in	the	western	half.	In	the	Inner-World	Arrangement,	therefore,
only	 Chên	 and	 Sun	 have	 not	 changed	 in	 sex.	 The	 diagram	 [fig.	 2]	 shows	 the	 three	 sons	 to	 the	 left	 of
Ch’ien,	the	Creative,	while	K’un	has	the	two	elder	daughters	at	the	right	and	the	youngest	daughter	at	the
left	between	itself	and	Ch’ien.

11.	Additional	Symbols
The	Creative	is	heaven.	It	is	round,	it	is	the	prince,	the	father,	jade,	metal,	cold,	ice;	it	is	deep	red,

a	good	horse,	an	old	horse,	a	lean	horse,	a	wild	horse,	tree	fruit.
Most	 of	 these	 symbols	 explain	 themselves.	 Jade	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 spotless	 purity	 and	 of	 firmness;	 so

likewise	is	metal.	Cold	and	ice	are	accounted	for	by	the	position	of	the	trigram	in	the	northwest.	Deep	red
is	the	intensified	color	of	the	light	principle	(in	the	text	itself,	midnight	blue	is	the	color	of	the	Creative,
according	with	the	color	of	the	sky).	The	various	horses	denote	power,	endurance,	firmness,	strength	(the
“wild”	horse	 is	a	mythical	saw-toothed	animal,	able	 to	 tear	even	a	 tiger	 to	pieces).	Fruit	 is	a	symbol	of
duration	in	change.

Later	commentaries	add	the	following:	it	is	straight,	it	is	the	dragon,	the	upper	garment,	the	word.
The	Receptive	is	the	earth,	the	mother.	It	is	cloth,	a	kettle,	frugality,	it	is	level,	it	is	a	cow	with	a

calf,	a	large	wagon,	form,	the	multitude,	a	shaft.	Among	the	various	kinds	of	soil,	it	is	the	black.
The	 first	 of	 these	 symbols	 are	 intelligible	 at	 a	 glance.	 Cloth	 is	 something	 spread	 out;	 the	 earth	 is

covered	with	 life	as	with	a	garment.	 In	 the	kettle,	 things	are	cooked	until	 they	are	done;	 similarly,	 the
earth	 is	 the	 great	 melting	 pot	 of	 life.	 Frugality	 is	 a	 fundamental	 characteristic	 of	 nature.	 “It	 is	 level”
means	 that	 the	 earth	 knows	 no	 partiality.	 A	 cow	 with	 a	 calf	 is	 a	 symbol	 of	 fertility.	 The	 large	 wagon
symbolizes	the	fact	that	the	earth	carries	all	living	things.	Form	and	ornament	are	the	opposite	of	content,
which	 finds	 expression	 in	 the	 Creative.	 The	multitude,	 plurality,	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 oneness	 of	 the
Creative.	The	shaft	is	the	body	of	the	tree,	from	which	the	branches	spring,	as	all	life	sprouts	forth	from
the	earth.	Black	is	intensified	darkness.2

The	 Arousing	 is	 thunder,	 the	 dragon.	 It	 is	 dark	 yellow,	 it	 is	 a	 spreading	 out,	 a	 great	 road,	 the
eldest	son.	It	is	decisive	and	vehement;	it	is	bamboo	that	is	green	and	young,	it	is	reed	and	rush.

Among	 horses	 it	 signifies	 those	which	 can	 neigh	well,	 those	with	white	 hind	 legs,	 those	which
gallop,	those	with	a	star	on	the	forehead.

Among	 useful	 plants	 it	 is	 the	 pod-bearing	 ones.	 Finally,	 it	 is	 the	 strong,	 that	 which	 grows
luxuriantly.

Dark	yellow	is	a	mixture	of	the	dark	heavens	and	the	yellow	earth.	A	“spreading	out”	(perhaps	to	be
read	 “blossoms”)	 suggests	 the	 luxuriant	 growth	 of	 spring,	 which	 covers	 the	 earth	 with	 a	 garment	 of
plants.	 A	 great	 road	 suggests	 the	 universal	 way	 to	 life	 in	 the	 spring.	 Bamboo,	 reed,	 and	 rush	 are
especially	 fast-growing	plants.	The	neighing	of	horses	denotes	 their	relationship	 to	 thunder.	White	hind
legs	gleam	from	afar	as	the	horses	run.	The	gallop	is	the	liveliest	gait.	The	seedlings	of	pod-bearing	plants
retain	the	pods.

The	Gentle	is	wood,	wind,	the	eldest	daughter,	the	guideline,	work;	it	 is	the	white,	the	long,	the
high;	it	is	advance	and	retreat,	the	undecided,	odor.

Among	men	it	means	the	gray-haired;	 it	means	those	with	broad	foreheads;	 it	means	those	with
much	white	in	their	eyes;	it	means	those	close	to	gain,	so	that	in	the	market	they	get	threefold	value.
Finally,	it	is	the	sign	of	vehemence.

The	first	of	these	meanings	need	no	further	explanation.	The	guideline	belongs	to	this	trigram	in	that	it
refers	to	a	windlike	dissemination	of	commands.	White	is	the	color	of	the	yin	principle.	Here	yin	is	in	the
lowest	place	at	the	beginning.	Wood	grows	long;	the	wind	goes	up	to	great	heights.	Advance	and	retreat
refer	to	the	changeableness	of	the	wind;	indecision	and	the	odor	wafted	by	the	wind	belong	in	this	same
context.	Gray-haired,	scanty-haired	people	have	a	great	deal	of	white	in	their	hair.	People	with	much	white



in	 their	 eyes	 are	 arrogant	 and	 vehement;	 those	who	are	 eager	 for	gain	 are	 likewise	 vehement,	 so	 that
finally	the	trigram	turns	into	its	opposite	and	represents	vehemence,	Chên.

The	Abysmal	is	water,	ditches,	ambush,	bending	and	straightening	out,	bow	and	wheel.
Among	men	it	means	the	melancholy,	those	with	sick	hearts,	those	with	earache.
It	is	the	blood	sign;	it	is	red.
Among	horses	it	means	those	with	beautiful	backs,	those	with	wild	courage,	those	which	let	their

heads	hang,	those	with	thin	hoofs,	those	which	stumble.
Among	chariots	it	means	those	with	many	defects.
It	is	penetration,	the	moon.
It	means	thieves.
Among	varieties	of	wood	it	means	those	which	are	firm	and	have	much	pith.

The	first	of	 these	attributes	are	again	self-explanatory.	Bending	and	straightening	out	are	 implied	by
the	winding	course	of	water;	this	leads	to	the	thought	of	something	bent,	of	bow	and	wheel.	Melancholy	is
expressed	by	the	fact	that	one	strong	line	is	hemmed	in	between	two	weak	lines;	thus	also	sickness	of	the
heart.	The	trigram	signifies	toil	and	also	the	ear.	Pains	in	the	ear	come	from	laborious	listening.

Blood	is	the	fluid	of	the	body,	therefore	the	symbolic	color	of	K’an	is	red,	though	a	somewhat	brighter
red	than	that	of	Ch’ien,	the	Creative.	Because	of	its	penetrating	quality	K’an,	when	applied	to	a	carriage,
is	made	 to	 symbolize	 a	 broken-down3	 vehicle	 that	 serves	 as	 a	wagon.	 Penetration	 is	 suggested	 by	 the
penetrating	line	in	the	middle	wedged	in	between	the	two	weak	lines.	As	a	water	element,	K’an	means	the
moon,	which	therefore	appears	as	masculine.	Persons	who	secretly	penetrate	a	place	and	sneak	away	are
thieves.	The	pithiness	of	wood	is	also	connected	with	the	attribute	of	penetration.

The	Clinging	is	fire,	the	sun,	lightning,	the	middle	daughter.
It	means	coats	of	mail	and	helmets;	it	means	lances	and	weapons.	Among	men	it	means	the	big-

bellied.
It	 is	 the	 sign	 of	 dryness.	 It	 means	 the	 tortoise,	 the	 crab,	 the	 snail,	 the	 mussel,	 the	 hawkbill

tortoise.
Among	trees	it	means	those	which	dry	out	in	the	upper	part	of	the	trunk.

Where	the	various	symbols	are	not	self-explanatory,	they	are	suggested	by	the	meaning	of	fire,	of	heat
and	dryness,	and	further	by	the	character	of	 the	trigram,	which	 is	 firm	without	and	hollow,	or	yielding,
within.	This	 aspect	 accounts	 for	 the	weapons,	 the	 fat	 belly,	 the	 shell-bearing	 creatures,	 and	 the	hollow
trees	beginning	to	wither	at	the	top.

Keeping	Still	is	the	mountain;	it	is	a	bypath;	it	means	little	stones,	doors	and	openings,	fruits	and
seeds,	eunuchs	and	watchmen,	the	fingers;	it	is	the	dog,	the	rat,	and	the	various	kinds	of	black-billed
birds.

Among	trees	it	signifies	the	firm	and	gnarled.
A	bypath	is	suggested	by	the	mountain	path,	and	so	are	stones.	A	gate	is	suggested	by	the	form	of	the

trigram.	 Fruits	 and	 seeds	 are	 the	 link	 between	 the	 end	 and	 the	 beginning	 of	 plants.	 Eunuchs	 are
doorkeepers,	and	watchmen	guard	the	streets;	both	protect	and	watch.	The	fingers	serve	to	hold	fast,	the
dog	keeps	guard,	the	rat	gnaws,	birds	with	black	beaks	grip	things	easily;	 likewise,	gnarled	tree	trunks
possess	the	greatest	power	of	resistance.

The	Joyous	is	the	lake,	the	youngest	daughter;	it	is	a	sorceress;	it	is	mouth	and	tongue.	It	means
smashing	and	breaking	apart;	it	means	dropping	off	and	bursting	open.	Among	the	kinds	of	soil	it	is
the	hard	and	salty.	It	is	the	concubine.	It	is	the	sheep.

The	sorceress	is	a	woman	who	speaks.	The	trigram	is	open	above,	hence	it	denotes	mouth	and	tongue.
It	stands	in	the	west	and	is	therefore	connected	with	the	idea	of	autumn,	destruction,	hence	the	smashing
and	 breaking	 apart,	 the	 dropping	 off	 and	 bursting	 open	 of	 ripe	 fruits.	Where	 lakes	 have	 dried	 up,	 the
ground	 is	 hard	 and	 salty.	 The	 concubine	 derives	 from	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 youngest	 daughter.	 The	 sheep,
outwardly	weak	and	inwardly	stubborn,	is	suggested	by	the	form	of	the	trigram,	as	already	mentioned.	(It
should	be	noted	that	in	China	sheep	and	goats	are	regarded	as	practically	the	same	animal	and	have	the
same	name.)



Ta	Chuan:	The	Great	Treatise	[Great	Commentary]1
(also	called	Hsi	Tz’u	Chuan,	Commentary	on	the	Appended	Judgments)

PART	I

A.	UNDERLYING	PRINCIPLES
CHAPTER	I.	The	Changes	in	the	Universe	and	in	the	Book	of	Changes
1.	 Heaven	 is	 high,	 the	 earth	 is	 low;	 thus	 the	 Creative	 and	 the	 Receptive	 are	 determined.	 In

correspondence	 with	 this	 difference	 between	 low	 and	 high,	 inferior	 and	 superior	 places	 are
established.

Movement	 and	 rest	 have	 their	 definite	 laws;	 according	 to	 these,	 firm	 and	 yielding	 lines	 are
differentiated.

Events	 follow	 definite	 trends,	 each	 according	 to	 its	 nature.	 Things	 are	 distinguished	 from	 one
another	 in	 definite	 classes.	 In	 this	 way	 good	 fortune	 and	 misfortune	 come	 about.	 In	 the	 heavens
phenomena	 take	 form;	 on	 earth	 shapes	 take	 form.	 In	 this	 way	 change	 and	 transformation	 become
manifest.
In	the	Book	of	Changes	a	distinction	is	made	between	three	kinds	of	change:	nonchange,	cyclic	change,

and	sequent	change.2	Nonchange	is	the	background,	as	it	were,	against	which	change	is	made	possible.
For	 in	 regard	 to	 any	 change	 there	 must	 be	 some	 fixed	 point	 to	 which	 the	 change	 can	 be	 referred;
otherwise	there	can	be	no	definite	order	and	everything	is	dissolved	in	chaotic	movement.	This	point	of
reference	 must	 be	 established,	 and	 this	 always	 requires	 a	 choice	 and	 a	 decision.	 It	 makes	 possible	 a
system	 of	 co-ordinates	 into	 which	 everything	 else	 can	 be	 fitted.	 Consequently	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
world,	 as	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 thought,	 there	 is	 the	 decision,	 the	 fixing	 of	 the	 point	 of	 reference.
Theoretically	any	point	of	reference	is	possible,	but	experience	teaches	that	at	the	dawn	of	consciousness
one	 stands	already	 inclosed	within	definite,	 prepotent	 systems	of	 relationships.	 The	problem	 then	 is	 to
choose	one’s	point	of	reference	so	that	it	coincides	with	the	point	of	reference	for	cosmic	events.	For	only
then	can	the	world	created	by	one’s	decision	escape	being	dashed	to	pieces	against	prepotent	systems	of
relationships	with	which	it	would	otherwise	come	into	conflict.	Obviously	the	premise	for	such	a	decision
is	 the	 belief	 that	 in	 the	 last	 analysis	 the	world	 is	 a	 system	of	 homogeneous	 relationships	—that	 it	 is	 a
cosmos,	not	a	chaos.	This	belief	is	the	foundation	of	Chinese	philosophy,	as	of	all	philosophy.	The	ultimate
frame	of	reference	for	all	that	changes	is	the	nonchanging.

The	Book	of	Changes	takes	as	the	foundation	for	this	system	of	relationships	the	distinction	between
heaven	and	earth.	There	is	heaven,	the	upper	world	of	light,	which,	though	incorporeal,	firmly	regulates
and	 determines	 everything	 that	 happens,	 and	 over	 against	 heaven	 there	 is	 the	 earth,	 the	 lower,	 dark
world,	 corporeal,	 and	 dependent	 in	 its	 movements	 upon	 the	 phenomena	 of	 heaven.	 With	 this
differentiation	of	above	and	below	there	is	posited,	 in	one	way	or	another,	a	difference	in	value,	so	that
the	one	principle,	heaven,	is	the	more	exalted	and	honored,	while	the	other,	earth,	is	regarded	as	lesser
and	 lower.	 These	 two	 cardinal	 principles	 of	 all	 existence	 are	 then	 symbolized	 in	 the	 two	 fundamental
hexagrams	of	the	Book	of	Changes,	THE	CREATIVE	and	THE	RECEPTIVE.	In	the	last	analysis,	this	cannot
be	called	a	dualism.	The	two	principles	are	united	by	a	relation	based	on	homogeneity;	they	do	not	combat
but	 complement	 each	 other.	 The	 difference	 in	 level	 creates	 a	 potential,	 as	 it	 were,	 by	 virtue	 of	 which
movement	and	living	expression	of	energy	become	possible.

This	association	of	high	and	low	with	value	differentiations	leads	to	the	differentiation	of	superior	and
inferior.	This	is	expressed	symbolically	in	the	hexagrams	of	the	Book	of	Changes,	which	are	considered	to
have	high	and	low,	superior	and	inferior	places.	Each	hexagram	consists	of	six	places,	of	which	the	odd-
numbered	ones	are	superior	and	the	even-numbered	ones	inferior.

There	 is	 another	difference	bound	up	with	 this	 one.	 In	 the	heavens	 constant	movement	 and	 change
prevail;	on	earth	fixed	and	apparently	lasting	conditions	are	to	be	observed.	On	closer	scrutiny,	this	is	only
delusion.	In	the	philosophy	of	the	Book	of	Changes	nothing	is	regarded	as	being	absolutely	at	rest;	rest	is
merely	an	intermediate	state	of	movement,	or	latent	movement.	However,	there	are	points	at	which	the
movement	becomes	visible.	This	is	symbolized	by	the	fact	that	the	hexagrams	are	built	up	of	both	firm	and
yielding	 lines.	 The	 firm,	 the	 strong,	 is	 designated	 as	 the	 principle	 of	 movement,	 the	 yielding	 as	 the
principle	of	rest.	The	firm	is	represented	by	an	undivided	line,	corresponding	with	the	light	principle,	the
yielding	by	a	divided	line	that	corresponds	with	the	dark	principle.

The	 fact	 that	 the	 character	 of	 the	 line	 (firm,	 yielding)	 combines	 with	 the	 character	 of	 the	 place
(superior,	 inferior)	 results	 in	a	great	multiplicity	of	possible	 situations.	This	 serves	 to	 symbolize	a	 third
nexus	of	events	 in	 the	world.	There	are	conditions	of	equilibrium,	 in	which	a	certain	harmony	prevails,
and	conditions	of	disturbed	equilibrium,	in	which	confusion	prevails.	The	reason	is	that	there	is	a	system
of	order	pervading	the	entire	world.	When,	in	accordance	with	this	order,	each	thing	is	in	its	appropriate
place,	 harmony	 is	 established.	 Such	 a	 tendency	 toward	 order	 can	 be	 observed	 in	 nature.	 The	 places
attract	 related	elements,	as	 it	were,	 so	 that	harmony	may	come	about.	However,	a	parallel	 tendency	 is
also	at	work.	Not	only	are	things	determined	by	their	tendency	toward	order:	they	move	also	by	virtue	of
forces	 imparted	 to	 them,	 so	 to	 speak,	 mechanically	 from	 the	 outside.	 Hence	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 for
equilibrium	 to	 be	 attained	 under	 all	 circumstances,	 for	 deviations	 may	 occur,	 bringing	 with	 them
confusion	and	disorder.	 In	 the	sphere	of	human	affairs,	 the	condition	of	harmony	assures	good	 fortune,
that	 of	 disharmony	 predicates	misfortune.	 These	 complexes	 of	 occurrences	 can	 be	 represented	 by	 the
combinations	of	lines	and	places,	as	pointed	out	above.

Another	law	is	to	be	noted.	Owing	to	changes	of	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars,	phenomena	take	form	in	the
heavens.	These	phenomena	obey	definite	laws.	Bound	up	with	them,	shapes	come	into	being	on	earth,	in
accordance	with	identical	laws.	Therefore	the	processes	on	earth—blossom	and	fruit,	growth	and	decay—



can	be	 calculated	 if	we	know	 the	 laws	of	 time.	 If	we	know	 the	 laws	of	 change,	we	can	precalculate	 in
regard	 to	 it,	 and	 freedom	 of	 action	 thereupon	 becomes	 possible.	 Changes	 are	 the	 imperceptible
tendencies	to	divergence	that,	when	they	have	reached	a	certain	point,	become	visible	and	bring	about
transformations.

These	are	the	immutable	laws	under	which,	according	to	Chinese	thought,	changes	are	consummated.
It	 is	 the	 purpose	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 to	 demonstrate	 these	 laws	 by	means	 of	 the	 laws	 of	 change
operating	 in	 the	 respective	 hexagrams.	 Once	 we	 succeed	 in	 completely	 reproducing	 these	 laws,	 we
acquire	a	comprehensive	view	of	events;	we	can	understand	past	and	future	equally	well	and	bring	this
knowledge	to	bear	in	our	actions.

2.	 Therefore	 the	 eight	 trigrams	 succeed	 one	 another	 by	 turns,	 as	 the	 firm	 and	 the	 yielding
displace	each	other.
Here	 cyclic	 change	 is	 explained.	 It	 is	 a	 rotation	 of	 phenomena,	 each	 succeeding	 the	 other	 until	 the

starting	point	 is	 reached	 again.	Examples	 are	 furnished	by	 the	 course	 of	 the	day	 and	 year,	 and	by	 the
phenomena	that	occur	in	the	organic	world	during	these	cycles.	Cyclic	change,	then,	is	recurrent	change
in	 the	 organic	 world,	 whereas	 sequent	 change	 means	 the	 progressive	 [nonrecurrent]	 change	 of
phenomena	produced	by	causality.

The	firm	and	the	yielding	displace	each	other	within	the	eight	trigrams.	Thus	the	firm	is	transformed,
melts	as	it	were,	and	becomes	the	yielding;	the	yielding	changes,	coalesces,	as	it	were,	and	becomes	the
firm.	In	this	way	the	eight	trigrams	change	from	one	into	another	in	turn,	and	the	regular	alternation	of
phenomena	within	the	year	takes	its	course.	But	this	is	the	case	in	all	cycles,	the	life	cycle	included.	What
we	know	as	day	and	night,	summer	and	winter—this,	in	the	life	cycle,	is	life	and	death.

To	make	more	intelligible	the	nature	of	cyclic	change	and	the	alternations	of	the	trigrams	produced	by
it,	 their	 sequence	 in	 the	Primal	Arrangement	 is	 shown	once	 again	 [fig.	3].	 There	 are	 two	 directions	 of
movement,	the	one	rightward,	ascending,	the	other	backward,	descending.	The	former	starts	from	the	low
point,	K’un,	the	Receptive,	earth;	the	latter	starts	from	the	high	point,	Ch’ien,	the	Creative,	heaven.

Figure	3
3.	 Things	 are	 aroused	 by	 thunder	 and	 lightning;	 they	 are	 fertilized	 by	wind	 and	 rain.	 Sun	 and

moon	follow	their	courses	and	it	is	now	hot,	now	cold.
Here	we	have	the	sequence	of	the	trigrams	in	the	changing	seasons	of	the	year,	and	in	such	a	way	that

each	is	the	cause	of	the	one	next	following.	Deep	in	the	womb	of	earth	there	stirs	the	creative	force,	Chên,
the	 Arousing,	 symbolized	 by	 thunder.	 As	 this	 electrical	 force	 appears	 there	 are	 formed	 centers	 of
activation	that	are	then	discharged	in	lightning.	Lightning	is	Li,	the	Clinging,	flame.	Hence	thunder	is	put
before	lightning.	Thunder	is,	so	to	speak,	the	agent	evoking	the	lightning;	 it	 is	not	merely	the	sounding
thunder.	Now	the	movement	shifts;	thunder’s	opposite,	Sun,	the	wind,	sets	in.	The	wind	brings	rain,	K’an.
Then	there	is	a	new	shift.	The	trigrams	Li	and	K’an,	formerly	acting	in	their	secondary	forms	as	lightning
and	rain,	now	appear	in	their	primary	forms	as	sun	and	moon.	In	their	cyclic	movement	they	cause	cold
and	heat.	When	the	sun	reaches	the	zenith,	heat	sets	in,	symbolized	by	the	trigram	of	the	southeast,	Tui,
the	Joyous,	the	lake.	When	the	moon	is	at	its	zenith	in	the	sky,	cold	sets	in,	symbolized	by	the	trigram	of
the	northwest,	Kên,	the	mountain,	Keeping	Still.	Hence	the	sequence	is	(cf.	fig.	3):

1a	—	2a	1b	—	2b
2a	—	3a	2b	—	3b
Thus	2a	(Li)	and	2b	(K’an)	are	named	twice,	once	in	their	secondary	forms	(lightning	and	rain),	once	in

their	primary	forms	(sun	and	moon).
4.	The	way	of	the	Creative	brings	about	the	male.

The	way	of	the	Receptive	brings	about	the	female.
Here	 the	beginning	of	 sequent	 change	appears,	manifested	 in	 the	 succession	of	 the	generations,	 an

onward-moving	process	that	never	returns	to	its	starting	point.	This	shows	the	extent	to	which	the	Book	of
Changes	 confines	 itself	 to	 life.	 For	 according	 to	Western	 ideas,	 sequent	 change	would	 be	 the	 realm	 in
which	 causality	 operates	 mechanically;	 but	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 takes	 sequent	 change	 to	 be	 the
succession	of	the	generations,	that	is,	still	something	organic.

The	Creative,	in	so	far	as	it	enters	as	a	principle	into	the	phenomenon	of	life,	is	embodied	in	the	male
sex;	the	Receptive	is	embodied	in	the	female	sex.	Thus	the	Creative	in	the	lowest	line	of	each	of	the	sons
(Chên,	Li,	Tui,	in	the	Primal	Arrangement),	and	the	Receptive	in	the	lowest	line	of	each	of	the	daughters
(Sun,	K’an,	Kên,	in	the	Primal	Arrangement),	is	the	sex	determinant	of	the	given	trigram.

5.	The	Creative	knows	the	great	beginnings.
The	Receptive	completes	the	finished	things.
Here	 the	principles	of	 the	Creative	and	 the	Receptive	are	 traced	 further.	The	Creative	produces	 the

invisible	seeds	of	all	development.	At	first	these	seeds	are	purely	abstract,	therefore	with	respect	to	them
there	can	be	no	action	nor	acting	upon;	here	it	is	knowledge	that	acts	creatively.	While	the	Creative	acts
in	the	world	of	the	invisible,	with	spirit	and	time	for	its	field,	the	Receptive	acts	upon	matter	in	space	and
brings	material	things	to	completion.	Here	the	processes	of	generation	and	birth	are	traced	back	to	their
ultimate	meta-physical	meanings.3



6.	The	Creative	knows	through	the	easy.
The	Receptive	can	do	things	through	the	simple.
The	nature	of	the	Creative	is	movement.	Through	movement	it	unites	with	ease	what	is	divided.	In	this

way	the	Creative	remains	effortless,	because	it	guides	infinitesimal	movements	when	things	are	smallest.
Since	the	direction	of	movement	is	determined	in	the	germinal	stage	of	being,	everything	else	develops
quite	effortlessly	of	itself,	according	to	the	law	of	its	nature.

The	nature	of	the	Receptive	is	repose.	Through	repose	the	absolutely	simple	becomes	possible	in	the
spatial	 world.	 This	 simplicity,	 which	 arises	 out	 of	 pure	 receptivity,	 becomes	 the	 germ	 of	 all	 spatial
diversity.

7.	What	is	easy,	is	easy	to	know;	what	is	simple,	is	easy	to	follow.	He	who	is	easy	to	know	attains
fealty.	He	who	is	easy	to	follow	attains	works.	He	who	possesses	attachment	can	endure	for	long;	he
who	possesses	works	can	become	great.	To	endure	is	the	disposition	of	the	sage;	greatness	is	the	field
of	action	of	the	sage.
This	passage	points	out	how	the	easy	and	the	simple	take	effect	in	human	life.	What	is	easy	is	readily

understood,	and	from	this	comes	its	power	of	suggestion.	He	whose	ideas	are	clear	and	easily	understood
wins	men’s	adherence	because	he	embodies	love.	In	this	way	he	becomes	free	of	confusing	conflicts	and
disharmonies.	 Since	 the	 inner	 movement	 is	 in	 harmony	 with	 the	 environment,	 it	 can	 take	 effect
undisturbed	 and	 have	 long	 duration.	 This	 consistency	 and	 duration	 characterize	 the	 disposition	 of	 the
sage.

It	is	exactly	the	same	in	the	realm	of	action.	Whatever	is	simple	can	easily	be	imitated.	Consequently,
others	are	ready	to	exert	their	energy	in	the	same	direction;	everyone	does	gladly	what	is	easy	for	him,
because	it	is	simple.	The	result	is	that	energy	is	accumulated,	and	the	simple	develops	quite	naturally	into
the	manifold.	 Thus	 it	 grows,	 and	 the	 sage’s	mission	 to	 lead	 the	multitude	 to	 the	 performance	 of	 great
works	is	fulfilled.

8.	By	means	of	the	easy	and	the	simple	we	grasp	the	laws	of	the	whole	world.	When	the	laws	of
the	whole	world	are	grasped,	therein	lies	perfection.
Here	we	are	 shown	how	 the	 fundamental	 principles	demonstrated	 above	 are	 applied	 in	 the	Book	of

Changes.	 The	 easy	 and	 the	 simple	 are	 symbolized	 by	 very	 slight	 changes	 in	 the	 individual	 lines.	 The
divided	lines	become	undivided	lines	as	the	result	of	an	easy	movement	that	joins	their	separated	ends;
undivided	 lines	 become	divided	 ones	by	means	 of	 a	 simple	division	 in	 the	middle.	 Thus	 the	 laws	 of	 all
processes	of	growth	under	heaven	are	depicted	in	these	easy	and	simple	changes,	and	thereby	perfection
is	attained.

Hereby	the	nature	of	change	is	defined	as	change	of	the	smallest	parts.	This	is	the	fourth	meaning	of
the	Chinese	word	I—a	connotation	that	has,	it	is	true,	only	a	loose	connection	with	the	meaning	“change.”

CHAPTER	II.	On	the	Composition	and	the	Use	of	the	Book	of	Changes
1.	The	holy	sages	instituted	the	hexagrams,	so	that	phenomena	might	be	perceived	therein.	They

appended	the	judgments,	in	order	to	indicate	good	fortune	and	misfortune.
The	hexagrams	of	the	Book	of	Changes	are	representations	of	earthly	phenomena.	In	their	interrelation

they	show	the	interrelation	of	events	in	the	world.	Thus	the	hexagrams	were	representations	of	ideas.	But
these	 images	 or	 phenomena	 revealed	 only	 the	 actual;	 there	 still	 remained	 the	 problem	 of	 extracting
counsel	from	them,	in	order	to	determine	whether	a	line	of	action	derived	from	the	image	was	favorable
or	harmful,	whether	it	should	be	adopted	or	avoided.	To	this	extent	the	foundation	of	the	Book	of	Changes
was	 already	 in	 existence	 in	 the	 time	 of	 King	Wên.	 The	 hexagrams	 were,	 so	 to	 speak,	 oracle	 pictures
showing	what	event	might	be	expected	to	occur	under	certain	circumstances.	King	Wên	and	his	son	then
added	the	 interpretations;	 from	these	 it	could	be	ascertained	whether	the	course	of	action	 indicated	by
the	 images	augured	good	or	 ill.	This	marked	the	entrance	of	 freedom	of	choice.	From	that	 time	on	one
could	see,	in	the	representation	of	events,	not	only	what	might	be	expected	to	happen	but	also	where	it
might	 lead.	 With	 the	 complex	 of	 events	 immediately	 before	 one	 in	 image	 form,	 one	 could	 follow	 the
courses	that	promised	good	fortune	and	avoid	those	that	promised	misfortune,	before	the	train	of	events
had	actually	begun.

2.	As	the	firm	and	the	yielding	lines	displace	one	another,	change	and	transformation	arise.
This	 brings	 out	 specifically	 the	 degree	 to	which	 events	 in	 the	world	 are	 represented	 in	 the	Book	 of

Changes.	The	hexagrams	are	made	up	of	 firm	and	yielding	 lines.	Under	certain	conditions	the	firm	and
the	 yielding	 lines	 change:	 the	 firm	 lines	 are	 transformed	 and	 softened,	 the	 yielding	 lines	 change	 and
become	firm.	Thus	we	have	a	reproduction	of	the	alternation	in	world	phenomena.

3.	 Therefore	 good	 fortune	 and	 misfortune	 are	 the	 images	 of	 gain	 and	 loss;	 remorse	 and
humiliation	are	the	images	of	sorrow	and	forethought.
When	the	trend	of	an	action	is	in	harmony	with	the	laws	of	the	universe,	it	leads	to	attainment	of	the

desired	goal;	this	is	expressed	in	the	appended	phrase	“Good	fortune.”	If	the	trend	is	in	opposition	to	the
laws	of	the	universe,	it	necessarily	leads	to	loss;	this	is	indicated	by	the	judgment	“Misfortune.”	There	are
also	trends	that	do	not	lead	directly	to	a	goal	but	are	rather	what	might	be	called	deviations	in	direction.
However,	if	a	trend	has	been	wrong,	and	we	feel	sorrow	in	time,	we	can	avoid	misfortune;	if	we	turn	back,
we	can	still	achieve	good	fortune.	This	situation	is	indicated	by	the	judgment	“Remorse.”	This	judgment,
then,	contains	an	exhortation	to	 feel	sorrow	and	turn	back.	On	the	other	hand,	a	given	trend	may	have
been	 right	 at	 the	 start,	 but	 one	 may	 become	 indifferent	 and	 arrogant,	 and	 heedlessly	 slip	 from	 good
fortune	into	misfortune.	This	is	indicated	by	the	judgment	“Humiliation.”	This	judgment,	then,	contains	an
admonition	 to	 exercise	 forethought,	 to	 check	 oneself	 when	 on	 the	 wrong	 path	 and	 turn	 back	 to	 good
fortune.



4.	Change	and	transformation	are	images	of	progress	and	retrogression.	The	firm	and	the	yielding
are	 images	 of	 day	 and	 night.	 The	movements	 of	 the	 six	 lines	 contain	 the	ways	 of	 the	 three	 primal
powers.
Change	is	the	conversion	of	a	yielding	line	into	a	firm	one.	This	means	progress.	Transformation	is	the

conversion	of	a	firm	line	into	a	yielding	one.	This	means	retrogression.	The	firm	lines	are	representations
of	 light;	 the	 yielding	 lines,	 of	 darkness.1	 The	 six	 lines	 of	 each	 hexagram	 are	 divided	 among	 the	 three
primal	 powers,	 heaven,	 earth,	 and	man.	 The	 two	 lower	 places	 are	 those	 of	 the	 earth,	 the	 two	middle
places	 belong	 to	man,	 and	 the	 two	 upper	 ones	 to	 heaven.	 This	 section	 shows	 the	 extent	 to	which	 the
content	of	the	Book	of	Changes	reproduces	the	conditions	of	the	world.

5.	Therefore	it	is	the	order	of	the	Changes	that	the	superior	man	devotes	himself	to	and	that	he
attains	tranquility	by.	It	is	the	judgments	on	the	individual	lines	that	the	superior	man	takes	pleasure
in	and	that	he	ponders	on.
From	this	point	on	we	are	shown	the	correct	use	of	the	Book	of	Changes.	For	the	very	reason	that	the

Book	of	Changes	is	a	reproduction	of	all	existing	conditions—with	its	appended	judgments	indicating	the
right	course	of	action—it	becomes	our	task	to	shape	our	lives	according	to	these	ideas,	so	that	life	in	its
turn	becomes	a	reproduction	of	this	law	of	change.	This	is	not	the	kind	of	idealism	that	artificially	imposes
an	 inflexible	 abstract	 pattern	 on	 a	 life	 of	 quite	 different	 mold.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes
embraces	the	essential	meaning	of	the	various	situations	of	life:	thus	we	are	in	position	to	shape	our	lives
meaningfully,	by	acting	in	accordance	with	order	and	sequence,	and	doing	in	each	case	what	the	situation
requires.	In	this	way	we	are	equal	to	every	situation,	because	we	accept	its	meaning	without	resistance,
and	so	we	attain	peace	of	soul.	Thus	our	actions	are	set	in	order,	and	the	mind	also	is	satisfied,	for	when
we	meditate	upon	the	judgments	on	the	individual	lines,	we	intuitively	perceive	the	interrelationships	in
the	world.

6.	Therefore	the	superior	man	contemplates	 these	 images	 in	 times	of	rest	and	meditates	on	the
judgments.	When	he	undertakes	something,	he	contemplates	the	changes	and	ponders	on	the	oracles.
Therefore	he	is	blessed	by	heaven.	“Good	fortune.	Nothing	that	does	not	further.”
Here	 times	 of	 rest	 and	 of	 action	 are	 mentioned.	 During	 times	 of	 rest,	 experience	 and	 wisdom	 are

obtained	by	meditation	on	the	images	and	judgments	of	the	book.	During	times	of	action	we	consult	the
oracle	 through	 the	medium	of	 the	 changes	arising	 in	 the	hexagrams	as	a	 result	 of	manipulation	of	 the
yarrow	stalks,	and	follow	according	to	indication	the	counsels	for	action	thus	supplied.

B.	DETAILED	DISCUSSION
CHAPTER	III.	On	the	Words	Attached	to	the	Hexagrams	and	the	Lines
1.	The	decisions	refer	to	the	images.	The	judgments	on	the	lines	refer	to	the	changes.

King	Wên’s	 decisions	 (judgments)	 refer	 in	 each	 case	 to	 the	 situation	 imaged	 by	 the	 hexagram	 as	 a
whole.	The	judgments	appended	by	the	Duke	of	Chou	to	the	individual	lines	refer	in	each	instance	to	the
changes	 taking	 place	within	 this	 situation.	 In	 consulting	 the	 oracle,	 the	 judgment	 on	 the	 line	 is	 to	 be
considered	only	when	the	line	in	question	“moves,”	that	is,	when	it	is	represented	either	by	a	nine	or	by	a
six	(cf.	explanation	of	the	method	of	consulting	the	oracle	in	the	appendix).

2.	“Good	fortune”	and	“misfortune”	refer	to	gain	and	loss,	“remorse”	and	“humiliation”	to	minor
imperfections.	“No	blame”	means	that	one	is	in	position	to	correct	one’s	mistakes	in	the	right	way.
This	passage	is	an	amplification	of	section	3	of	the	preceding	chapter.	Always	making	the	right	choice

in	words	and	acts	means	gain;	failing	in	this	results	in	loss.	Slight	deviations	from	what	is	right	are	called
imperfections.	When	one	does	not	know	what	is	right	and	does	wrong	inadvertently,	it	is	called	a	mistake.
If	 we	 become	 conscious	 of	 these	 small	 lapses	 from	 the	 right	 and	 feel	 a	wish	 to	 remedy	 them,	we	 are
moved	by	remorse.	If	we	remain	unaware	of	them,	or	if	we	have	the	opportunity	to	remedy	them	but	are
either	 unable	 or	 unwilling	 to	 do	 so,	 humiliation	 results.	Mistakes	 are	 like	 rents	 in	 a	 garment;	 when	 a
garment	has	been	torn	and	one	mends	it,	it	is	whole	again.	If	we	amend	mistakes	by	a	return	to	the	right
path,	no	blame	remains.

3.	 Therefore	 the	 classification	 of	 superior	 and	 inferior	 is	 based	 upon	 the	 individual	 places;	 the
equalizing	 of	 great	 and	 small	 is	 based	 upon	 the	 hexagrams,	 and	 the	 discrimination	 between	 good
fortune	and	misfortune	is	based	upon	the	judgments.
The	 six	 places	 in	 the	 hexagram	are	 distinguished	 as	 follows:	 The	 lowest	 and	 the	 topmost	 are,	 so	 to

speak,	outside	the	situation.	Of	these,	the	lowest	is	inferior,	because	it	has	not	yet	entered	the	situation.
The	uppermost	is	superior;	it	is	the	place	of	the	sage	who	is	no	longer	involved	in	worldly	affairs,	or,	under
certain	 circumstances,	 of	 an	 eminent	man	who	 is	 without	 power.	 Of	 the	 inner	 places,	 the	 second	 and
fourth	are	those	of	officials,	or	of	sons	or	women.	The	fourth	is	the	higher,	the	second	inferior	to	it.	The
third	and	fifth	are	authoritative	places,	the	former	because	it	is	at	the	top	of	the	lower	trigram,	and	the
latter	because	it	is	the	place	of	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.

“Great”	and	 “small”	 signify	 firm	and	yielding	 lines	 respectively.	They	are	equalized	 in	 the	hexagram
considered	as	a	whole.	Both	can	be	favorable	and	indicative	of	good	fortune	when	in	their	proper	places,
but	the	appropriateness	of	the	places	cannot	be	determined	in	the	abstract;	it	depends	on	the	character	of
the	hexagram	as	a	whole.	The	situation	may	frequently	be	such	that	yielding	is	advantageous;	in	that	case
a	yielding	 line	 in	a	 yielding	place	will	 be	especially	 favorable,	while	a	 firm	 line	 in	a	 firm	place	may	be
unfavorable.	 In	 many	 cases	 strength	 is	 required,	 and	 then	 a	 firm	 place	 is	 more	 advantageous	 for	 a
yielding	line.	In	other	cases	the	situation	may	demand	that	character	and	place	coincide.	In	a	word,	the
specific	 distribution	 is	 determined	 by	 the	 hexagram	 in	 question,	 that	 is	 to	 say,	 by	 the	 situation	 it
reproduces.	Therefore	 the	 judgments	are	appended,	 to	 indicate	 the	good	or	 ill	 fortune	arising	 from	the
situation.



4.	Concern	over	remorse	and	humiliation	depends	on	the	borderline.	The	urge	to	blamelessness
depends	on	remorse.
Remorse	and	humiliation	are	 the	results	of	a	deviation	 from	the	right	path	and	consequently	always

require	a	reversal	of	attitude.	One	can	avoid	both	by	being	on	guard	in	time.	The	point	at	which	concern
must	set	in,	if	one	is	to	be	spared	remorse	and	humiliation,	is	that	point	at	which	good	or	evil	has	begun	to
stir	in	the	mind	but	has	not	yet	crossed	the	threshold	into	actuality.	If	at	this	moment	one	takes	action	and
directs	the	movement	in	its	germinal	phase	toward	the	good,	one	will	be	spared	remorse	and	humiliation.
If,	however,	a	mistake	has	already	been	made,	remorse	is	the	psychological	force	leading	to	repentance
and	improvement.

5.	 This	 is	 why	 there	 are	 small	 and	 great	 among	 the	 hexagrams,	 and	 therefore	 the	 appended
judgments	speak	of	danger	or	safety.	The	judgments	in	each	case	indicate	the	trend	of	development.
Among	 the	 situations	 reproduced	 by	 the	 hexagrams	 there	 are	 some	 of	 ascending	 and	 expanding

potentiality	 and	 some	 of	 descending,	 contracting	 potentiality.	 Accordingly,	 at	 some	 times	 one	must	 be
prepared	 for	danger,	while	at	others	one	may	hope	 for	 safety	and	 tranquility.	 In	order	 to	adapt	oneself
completely	to	the	given	situation,	it	is	of	great	value	to	know	these	conditions.	This	is	the	function	of	the
judgments:	they	indicate	in	each	case	the	direction	in	which	the	situation	is	developing.

CHAPTER	IV.	The	Deeper	Implications	of	the	Book	of	Changes
1.	 The	 Book	 of	 Changes	 contains	 the	measure	 of	 heaven	 and	 earth;	 therefore	 it	 enables	 us	 to

comprehend	the	tao	of	heaven	and	earth	and	its	order.
This	 chapter	 sets	 forth	 the	mysterious	 connections	 existing	 between	 the	 reproductions	 given	 in	 the

Book	of	Changes	and	reality.	Since	the	book	presents	a	complete	image	of	heaven	and	earth,	a	microcosm
of	all	possible	 relationships,	 it	enables	us	 to	calculate	 the	movements	 in	every	situation	 to	which	 these
reproductions	apply.	If	we	ask	how	the	Book	of	Changes	can	be	a	reproduction	of	the	cosmos,	the	answer
is	 that	 it	 is	 the	work	of	men	with	 cosmic	 intelligence,	men	who	have	 incorporated	 their	wisdom	 in	 the
symbols	of	this	book.	Hence	it	contains	the	standard	of	heaven	and	earth.

The	 following	 section	 explains	 how	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 contains	 the	 measure,	 the
standard	of	heaven	and	earth,	makes	it	possible	for	us	to	investigate	with	its	help	the	laws	of	the	universe.
Section	3	deduces	from	the	resemblance	of	the	Changes	to	heaven	and	earth	a	complete	representation	of
inner	predispositions.	The	fourth	section,	starting	from	the	fact	that	the	Changes	comprise	all	forms	and
situations,	shows	how	we	can	attain	ultimate	mastery	of	fate.

2.	 Looking	 upward,	 we	 contemplate	 with	 its	 help	 the	 signs	 in	 the	 heavens;	 looking	 down,	 we
examine	the	 lines	of	 the	earth.	Thus	we	come	to	know	the	circumstances	of	 the	dark	and	the	 light.
Going	back	to	the	beginnings	of	things	and	pursuing	them	to	the	end,	we	come	to	know	the	lessons	of
birth	and	of	death.	The	union	of	 seed	and	power	produces	all	 things;	 the	escape	of	 the	soul	brings
about	change.	Through	this	we	come	to	know	the	conditions	of	outgoing	and	returning	spirits.
The	 Book	 of	 Changes	 is	 based	 on	 the	 two	 fundamental	 principles	 of	 the	 light	 and	 the	 dark.	 The

hexagrams	are	built	up	out	of	these	elements.	The	individual	lines	are	either	at	rest	or	in	motion.	When	at
rest—that	 is,	 when	 represented	 by	 the	 number	 seven	 (firm)	 or	 eight	 (yielding)—they	 build	 up	 the
hexagram,	When	in	motion—that	 is,	when	represented	by	the	number	nine	(firm)	or	six	(yielding)—they
break	down	the	hexagram	again	and	transform	it	into	a	new	hexagram.	These	are	the	processes	that	open
our	eyes	to	the	secrets	of	life.

When	we	apply	these	principles	to	the	signs	in	the	heavens	(the	sun	standing	for	 light,	the	moon	for
darkness)	 and	 to	 the	 lines	 of	 direction	 on	 the	 earth	 (the	 cardinal	 points),	 we	 learn	 to	 know	 the
circumstances	concerning	the	dark	and	the	light,	i.e.,	the	laws	that	bring	about	the	course	and	alternation
of	 the	 seasons	 and	 that	 condition	 the	 appearance	and	withdrawal	 of	 the	 vegetative	 life	 force.	Thus	we
learn	by	observing	the	beginnings	and	endings	of	life	that	birth	and	death	form	one	recurrent	cycle.	Birth
is	 the	 coming	 forth	 into	 the	 world	 of	 the	 visible;	 death	 is	 the	 return	 into	 the	 regions	 of	 the	 invisible.
Neither	of	these	signifies	an	absolute	beginning	nor	an	absolute	ending,	any	more	than	do	the	changes	of
the	seasons	within	the	year.	Nor	is	it	otherwise	in	the	case	of	man.	Just	as	the	resting	lines	build	up	the
hexagrams	and	produce	change	when	they	begin	to	move,	so	bodily	existence	is	built	up	by	the	union	of
“outgoing”	 life	 streams	of	 seed	 (male)	with	power	 (female).	This	 corporeal	 existence	 remains	 relatively
constant	as	 long	as	 the	constructive	 forces	are	 in	 the	resting	state,	 in	equilibrium.	When	 they	begin	 to
move,	disintegration	sets	in.	The	psychic	element	escapes—the	higher	part	mounting	upward,	the	lower
sinking	to	earth;	the	body	disintegrates.

The	spiritual	forces	that	produce	the	building	up	and	the	breaking	down	of	visible	existence	likewise
belong	either	to	the	light	principle	or	to	the	dark	principle.	The	light	spirits	(shên)	are	outgoing;	they	are
the	active	spirits,	which	can	also	enter	upon	new	incarnations.	The	dark	spirits	(kuei),	return	home;	they
are	the	withdrawing	forces	and	have	the	task	of	assimilating	what	life	has	yielded.1

This	idea	of	returning	and	outgoing	spirits	by	no	means	entails	the	notion	of	good	and	evil	beings;	 it
only	differentiates	the	expanding	and	the	contracting	phase	of	the	underlying	life	energy.	These	are	the
ebb	and	flow	in	the	great	ocean	of	life.

3.	Since	in	this	way	man	comes	to	resemble	heaven	and	earth,	he	is	not	in	conflict	with	them.	His
wisdom	embraces	all	things,	and	his	tao	brings	order	into	the	whole	world;	therefore	he	does	not	err.
He	 is	 active	 everywhere	 but	 does	 not	 let	 himself	 be	 carried	 away.	 He	 rejoices	 in	 heaven	 and	 has
knowledge	of	fate,	therefore	he	is	free	of	care.	He	is	content	with	his	circumstances	and	genuine	in
his	kindness,	therefore	he	can	practice	love.
Here	 we	 are	 shown	 how	 with	 the	 help	 of	 the	 fundamental	 principles	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 it	 is

possible	to	arrive	at	a	complete	realization	of	man’s	innate	capacities.	This	unfolding	rests	on	the	fact	that



man	has	innate	capacities	that	resemble	heaven	and	earth,	that	he	is	a	microcosm.	Now,	since	the	laws	of
heaven	and	earth	are	reproduced	in	the	Book	of	Changes,	man	is	provided	with	the	means	of	shaping	his
own	 nature,	 so	 that	 his	 inborn	 potentialities	 for	 good	 can	 be	 completely	 realized.	 In	 this	 process	 two
factors	 are	 to	 be	 taken	 into	 account:	 wisdom	 and	 action,	 or	 intellect	 and	will.	 If	 intellect	 and	will	 are
correctly	centered,	the	emotional	life	takes	on	harmony.	We	have	here	four	propositions	based	on	wisdom
and	love,	justice	and	mores,	reminding	us	of	the	combination	of	these	principles	with	the	four	words	in	the
hexagram	Ch’ien,	THE	CREATIVE:	“Sublime	success;	perseverance	furthers.”

The	effect	of	wisdom,	love,	and	justice	is	shown	in	the	first	proposition.	On	the	basis	of	all-embracing
wisdom,	 the	 regulations	 springing	 from	 a	 love	 of	 the	 world	 can	 be	 so	 shaped	 that	 all	 goes	 well	 for
everyone	and	no	mistakes	are	made.	This	is	what	furthers.	The	second	proposition	pictures	wisdom	and
love,	excluding	no	person	or	thing;	these	are	regulated	by	the	mores,	which	do	not	allow	one	to	be	carried
away	 into	anything	 improper	or	one-sided,	and	therefore	have	success.	The	third	proposition	shows	the
harmony	 of	 mind,	 perfect	 in	 wisdom,	 that	 rejoices	 in	 heaven	 and	 understands	 its	 dispensations.	 This
provides	the	basis	for	perseverance.	Finally;	the	last	proposition	shows	the	love	that	acquiesces	trustingly
in	 every	 situation	 and,	 out	 of	 its	 store	 of	 inner	 kindness,	manifests	 itself	 in	 good	will	 toward	 all	men,
thereby	attaining	sublimity,	the	root	of	all	good.

4.	In	it	are	included	the	forms	and	the	scope	of	everything	in	the	heavens	and	on	earth,	so	that
nothing	escapes	 it.	 In	 it	all	 things	everywhere	are	completed,	so	 that	none	 is	missing.	Therefore	by
means	of	 it	we	can	penetrate	the	tao	of	day	and	night,	and	so	understand	 it.	Therefore	the	spirit	 is
bound	to	no	one	place,	nor	the	Book	of	Changes	to	any	one	form.
We	are	shown	here	how	the	individual	can	attain	mastery	over	fate	by	means	of	the	Book	of	Changes.

Its	principles	contain	the	categories	of	all	that	is—literally,	the	molds	and	the	scope	of	all	transformations.
These	 categories	 are	 in	 the	mind	 of	man;	 everything,	 all	 that	 happens	 and	 everything	 that	 undergoes
transformation,	must	 obey	 the	 laws	prescribed	by	 the	mind	of	man.	Not	until	 these	 categories	become
operative	 do	 things	 become	 things.	 These	 categories	 are	 laid	 down	 in	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes;	 hence	 it
enables	us	to	penetrate	and	understand	the	movements	of	the	light	and	the	dark,	of	life	and	death,	of	gods
and	demons.	This	knowledge	makes	possible	mastery	over	fate,	because	fate	can	be	shaped	if	its	laws	are
known.	The	reason	why	we	can	oppose	fate	is	that	reality	is	always	conditioned,	and	these	conditions	of
time	and	space	limit	and	determine	it.	The	spirit,	however,	 is	not	bound	by	these	determinants	and	can
bring	 them	about	as	 its	own	purposes	 require.	The	Book	of	Changes	 is	 so	widely	applicable	because	 it
contains	 only	 these	 purely	 spiritual	 relationships,	 which	 are	 so	 abstract	 that	 they	 can	 find	 expression
within	every	framework	of	reality.	They	contain	only	the	tao	that	underlies	events.	Therefore	all	chance
contingencies	can	be	shaped	according	to	this	tao.	The	conscious	application	of	these	possibilities	assures
mastery	over	fate.

CHAPTER	V.	Tao	in	Its	Relation	to	the	Light	Power	and	to	the	Dark	Power
1.	That	which	lets	now	the	dark,	now	the	light	appear	is	tao.

The	light	and	the	dark	are	the	two	primal	powers,	designated	hitherto	in	the	text	as	firm	and	yielding,
or	as	day	and	night.	Firm	and	yielding	are	the	terms	applied	to	the	lines	of	the	Book	of	Changes,	while
light	and	dark	designate	the	two	primal	powers	of	nature.	It	must	be	left	to	a	later	discussion	to	explain
why	up	to	this	point	the	designations	day	and	night	have	been	used,	and	now	suddenly	the	terms	light	and
dark	appear.	Possibly	we	are	dealing	here	with	a	later	stratum	of	text.	At	any	rate,	we	can	observe	that	in
the	course	of	time	the	use	of	these	expressions	steadily	increases.

The	terms	yin,	the	dark,	and	yang,	the	light,	denote	respectively	the	shadowed	and	the	light	side	of	a
mountain	 or	 a	 river.	 Yang	 represents	 the	 south	 side	 of	 the	 mountain,	 because	 this	 side	 receives	 the
sunlight,	but	it	connotes	the	north	side	of	the	river,	because	the	light	of	the	river	is	reflected	to	that	side.
The	reverse	is	true	as	regards	yin.	These	terms	are	gradually	extended	to	include	the	two	polar	forces	of
the	 universe,	 which	 we	 may	 call	 positive	 and	 negative.1	 It	 may	 be	 that	 these	 designations,	 which
emphasize	the	cycle	of	change	more	than	change	itself,	led	also	to	the	representation	in	circular	form	of
the	Primal	Beginning,	 	[t’ai	chi	t’u],	the	symbol	that	was	later	to	play	such	an	important	part	in	Chinese
thought.

2.	As	continuer,	it	is	good.	As	completer,	it	is	the	essence.
The	primal	powers	never	 come	 to	a	 standstill;	 the	 cycle	of	becoming	continues	uninterruptedly.	The

reason	is	that	between	the	two	primal	powers	there	arises	again	and	again	a	state	of	tension,	a	potential
that	keeps	the	powers	in	motion	and	causes	them	to	unite,	whereby	they	are	constantly	regenerated.	Tao
brings	 this	about	without	ever	becoming	manifest.	The	power	of	 tao	 to	maintain	 the	world	by	constant
renewal	of	a	state	of	tension	between	the	polar	forces,	is	designated	as	good2	(cf.	Lao-tse,	chap.	8).

As	 the	power	 that	 completes	 things,	 the	power	 that	 lends	 them	 their	 individuality	 and	gives	 them	a
center	around	which	they	organize,	tao	is	called	the	essence,	that	with	which	things	are	endowed	at	their
origin.3

3.	The	kind	man	discovers	 it	 and	calls	 it	 kind.	The	wise	man	discovers	 it	 and	calls	 it	wise.	The
people	use	it	day	by	day	and	are	not	aware	of	it,	for	the	way	of	the	superior	man	is	rare.
Tao	 reveals	 itself	 differently	 to	 each	 individual,	 according	 to	 his	 own	nature.	 The	man	 of	 deeds,	 for

whom	kindness	and	the	love	of	his	fellow	man	are	supreme,	discovers	the	tao	of	cosmic	events	and	calls	it
supreme	kindness—”God	is	love.”	The	contemplative	man,	for	whom	calm	wisdom	is	supreme,	discovers
the	tao	of	the	universe	and	calls	it	supreme	wisdom.	The	common	people	live	from	day	to	day,	continually
borne	and	nourished	by	tao,	but	they	know	nothing	of	it;	they	see	only	what	meets	the	eye.	For	the	way	of
the	superior	man,	who	sees	not	only	things	but	the	tao	of	things,	is	rare.	The	tao	of	the	universe	is	indeed
kindness	and	wisdom;	but	essentially	tao	is	also	beyond	kindness	and	wisdom.



4.	It	manifests	itself	as	kindness	but	conceals	its	workings.	It	gives	life	to	all	things,	but	it	does	not
share	the	anxieties	of	the	holy	sage.	Its	glorious	power,	its	great	field	of	action,	are	of	all	things	the
most	sublime.
The	movement	from	within	outward	shows	tao	in	its	manifestations	as	the	force	of	supreme	kindness.

At	 the	 same	 time	 it	 remains	 mysterious	 even	 in	 the	 light	 of	 day.	 The	movement	 from	 without	 inward
conceals	the	results	of	its	workings.	It	is	just	as	when	in	spring	and	summer	the	seeds	start	growing,	and
the	 life-giving	 bounty	 of	 nature	 becomes	manifest:	 but	 along	with	 it	 there	 is	 at	work	 that	 quiet	 power
which	conceals	within	 the	seed	all	 the	results	of	growth	and	 in	hidden	ways	prepares	what	 the	coming
year	 is	 to	 bring.	 Tao	works	 tirelessly	 and	 eternally	 in	 this	way.	 Yet	 this	 life-giving	 activity,	 to	which	 all
beings	owe	their	existence,	is	something	purely	spontaneous.	It	is	not	like	the	conscious	anxiety	of	man,
who	strives	for	the	good	with	inward	toil.

5.	 It	 possesses	 everything	 in	 complete	 abundance:	 this	 is	 its	 great	 field	 of	 action.	 It	 renews
everything	daily:	this	is	its	glorious	power.
There	is	nothing	that	tao	may	not	possess,	 for	 it	 is	omnipresent;	everything	that	exists,	exists	 in	and

through	 it.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 lifeless	 possessing;	 by	 reason	 of	 its	 eternal	 power,	 it	 continually	 renews
everything,	so	that	each	day	the	world	becomes	as	glorious	again	as	it	was	on	the	first	day	of	creation.

6.	As	begetter	of	all	begetting,	it	is	called	change.
The	dark	begets	the	light	and	the	light	begets	the	dark	in	ceaseless	alternation,	but	that	which	begets

this	alternation,	that	to	which	all	life	owes	its	existence,	is	tao	with	its	law	of	change.
7.	 As	 that	which	 completes	 the	 primal	 images,	 it	 is	 called	 the	Creative;	 as	 that	which	 imitates

them,	it	is	called	the	Receptive.
This	is	based	on	the	view	expressed	likewise	in	the	Tao	Tê	Ching,4	namely,	that	underlying	reality	there

is	a	world	of	archetypes,	and	reproductions	of	these	make	up	the	real	things	in	the	material	world.	The
world	of	archetypes	is	heaven,	the	world	of	reproductions	is	the	earth:	there	energy,	here	matter;	there
the	Creative,	 here	 the	 Receptive.	 But	 it	 is	 the	 same	 tao	 that	 is	 active	 both	 in	 the	 Creative	 and	 in	 the
Receptive.

8.	In	that	it	serves	for	exploring	the	laws	of	number	and	thus	for	knowing	the	future,	it	is	called
revelation.	In	that	it	serves	to	infuse	an	organic	coherence	into	the	changes,	it	is	called	the	work.
The	 future	 likewise	 develops	 in	 accordance	with	 the	 fixed	 laws,	 according	 to	 calculable	 numbers.	 If

these	numbers	are	known,	future	events	can	be	calculated	with	perfect	certainty.	This	is	the	thought	on
which	the	Book	of	Changes	is	based.	This	world	of	the	immutable	is	the	daemonic	world,	in	which	there	is
no	 free	choice,	 in	which	everything	 is	 fixed.	 It	 is	 the	world	of	yin.	But	 in	addition	 to	 this	rigid	world	of
number,	there	are	living	trends.	Things	develop,	consolidate	in	a	given	direction,	grow	rigid,	then	decline;
a	change	sets	in,	coherence	is	established	once	more,	and	the	world	is	one	again.	The	secret	of	tao	in	this
world	of	the	mutable,	the	world	of	light—the	realm	of	yang—is	to	keep	the	changes	in	motion	in	such	a
manner	that	no	stasis	occurs	and	an	unbroken	coherence	is	maintained.	He	who	succeeds	in	endowing	his
work	with	this	regenerative	power	creates	something	organic,	and	the	thing	so	created	is	enduring.

9.	That	aspect	of	it	which	cannot	be	fathomed	in	terms	of	the	light	and	the	dark	is	called	spirit.
In	 their	 alternation	 and	 reciprocal	 effect,	 the	 two	 fundamental	 forces	 serve	 to	 explain	 all	 the

phenomena	in	the	world.	Nonetheless,	there	remains	something	that	cannot	be	explained	in	terms	of	the
interaction	 of	 these	 forces,	 a	 final	 why.	 This	 ultimate	 meaning	 of	 tao	 is	 the	 spirit,	 the	 divine,	 the
unfathomable	in	it,	that	which	must	be	revered	in	silence.

CHAPTER	VI.	Tao	as	Applied	to	the	Book	of	Changes
1.	 The	Book	 of	Changes	 is	 vast	 and	 great.	When	 one	 speaks	 of	what	 is	 far,	 it	 knows	 no	 limits.

When	one	speaks	of	what	is	near,	it	is	still	and	right.	When	one	speaks	of	the	space	between	heaven
and	earth,	it	embraces	everything.
Here	the	Book	of	Changes	is	brought	into	relation	with	the	macrocosm	and	the	microcosm.	First	the

horizontal	extent	of	its	domain,	its	vastness,	is	given;	its	laws	are	valid	to	the	utmost	distance	and	likewise
for	what	is	nearest,	as	one’s	own	inner	laws.	Then	the	vertical	extent	is	given,	the	space	between	heaven
and	earth,	because	the	fates	of	men	come	down	to	them	from	heaven.

2.	In	a	state	of	rest	the	Creative	is	one,	and	in	a	state	of	motion	it	is	straight;	therefore	it	creates
that	 which	 is	 great.	 The	 Receptive	 is	 closed	 in	 a	 state	 of	 rest,	 and	 in	 a	 state	 of	 motion	 it	 opens;
therefore	it	creates	that	which	is	vast.
“The	Creative”	means	here	the	trigram	in	the	Book	of	Changes,	and	more	especially	the	line,	by	which

it	is	symbolized.	When	at	rest,	this	is	a	simple	unbroken	line	(———);	when	it	is	in	motion,	its	direction	is
straight	forward.	The	Receptive	is	symbolized	by	a	divided	line	(—	—);	it	is	closed	when	at	rest	and	opens
when	in	motion.	Thus	that	which	is	wrought	by	the	Creative	is	designated,	in	accordance	with	its	nature,
as	 great.	 The	 Creative	 produces	 quality.	 That	 which	 is	 produced	 by	 the	 Receptive	 is	 designated,	 in
accordance	with	its	form,	as	broad	and	manifold.	The	Receptive	produces	quantity.

3.	Because	 of	 its	 vastness	 and	greatness,	 it	 corresponds	with	 heaven	 and	 earth.	Because	 of	 its
changes	and	its	continuity,	it	corresponds	with	the	four	seasons.	Because	of	the	meaning	of	the	light
and	the	dark,	 it	corresponds	with	sun	and	moon.	Because	of	the	good	in	the	easy	and	the	simple,	 it
corresponds	with	the	supreme	power.
Here	 the	 parallels	 between	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 and	 the	 cosmos	 are	 shown.	 The	 Book	 of	 Changes

contains	material	multiplicity,	quantity,	like	the	earth.	It	contains	dynamic	greatness,	quality,	like	heaven.
It	 shows	 changes	 and	 closed	 systems	 like	 the	 course	 of	 the	 year	within	 the	 four	 seasons.	 In	 the	 light
principle	it	reveals	the	same	meaning	as	that	underlying	the	sun.	The	light	principle	is	called	yang.	The
term	for	the	sun	is	t’ai	yang,	the	Great	Light.	In	the	dark	principle,	it	reveals	the	same	meaning	as	that



underlying	the	moon.	The	dark	principle	is	called	yin.	The	term	for	the	moon	is	t’ai	yin,	the	Great	Dark.
It	 has	 been	 explained	 above	 that	 the	 essence	 of	 the	 Creative	 lies	 in	 the	 easy,	 the	 essence	 of	 the

Receptive	 in	 the	 simple,	 in	 those	 seeds	 from	which	 everything	 else	 develops	 spontaneously.	 This	mode
corresponds	with	the	good	in	tao,	its	art	of	continuing	life	in	the	simplest	manner	(cf.	chap.	V,	sec.	2),	and
thus	it	corresponds	with	the	supreme	power	of	tao	(cf.	chap.	V,	sec.	4).

CHAPTER	VII.	The	Effects	of	the	Book	of	Changes	on	Man
1.	The	Master	said:	Is	not	the	Book	of	Changes	supreme?	By	means	of	 it	 the	holy	sages	exalted

their	natures	and	extended	their	field	of	action.
Wisdom	 exalts.	 The	 mores	 make	 humble.	 The	 exalted	 imitate	 heaven.	 The	 humble	 follow	 the

example	of	the	earth.
These	words	 are	 explicitly	 attributed	 to	Confucius,	 consequently	 the	 essay	 of	which	 they	 are	 a	 part

cannot	 in	 its	entirety	have	originated	with	Confucius,	but	 is	rather	a	product	of	his	school.	Actually	the
several	chapters	do	contain	commentaries	of	very	different	sorts,	which	probably	also	belong	to	different
periods.

We	 are	 shown	 here	 how	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes,	 correctly	 used,	 leads	 to	 harmony	 with	 the	 ultimate
principles	of	the	universe.	The	sages	exalt	their	natures	by	acquiring	the	wisdom	preserved	in	this	book,
and	thus	they	arrive	at	harmony	with	heaven,	which	is	high.	On	the	one	hand,	the	mind	gains	loftiness	of
viewpoint;	on	the	other	hand,	the	field	of	action	is	widened.	This	comprehensiveness	gives	rise	to	the	idea
of	mores:	the	individual	subordinates	himself	to	the	whole.	Through	such	humble	subordination,	the	sages
arrive	at	harmony	with	the	earth,	which	is	low.	Thus	the	individual	enlarges	his	field	of	action.

2.	Heaven	and	earth	determine	 the	 scene,	 and	 the	 changes	 take	effect	within	 it.	 The	perfected
nature	of	man,	sustaining	itself	and	enduring,	is	the	gateway	of	tao	and	justice.
Heaven	 is	 the	 scene	 of	 the	 spiritual,	 earth	 is	 the	 scene	 of	 the	 corporeal.	 In	 these	worlds	move	 the

things	that	develop	and	are	transformed	according	to	the	rules	of	the	Book	of	Changes.	So	likewise	the
nature	of	man,	which	is	perfected	and	endures,	is	the	gateway	through	which	the	actions	of	man	go	in	and
out,	and	when	man	 is	 in	harmony	with	the	teachings	of	 the	Book	of	Changes,	 these	actions	correspond
with	the	tao	of	the	universe	and	with	justice.	Tao,	which	manifests	itself	as	kindness,	corresponds	with	the
light	principle,	 and	 justice	 corresponds	with	 the	dark	principle:	 the	one	 relates	 to	 the	exalting	and	 the
other	to	the	broadening	of	man’s	nature.

CHAPTER	VIII.	On	the	Use	of	the	Appended	Explanations
1.	The	holy	sages	were	able	 to	survey	all	 the	confused	diversities	under	heaven.	They	observed

forms	and	phenomena,	and	made	representations	of	things	and	their	attributes.	These	were	called	the
Images.
Here	we	are	shown	how	the	 images	of	 the	Book	of	Changes	developed	out	of	 the	archetypal	 images

that	underlie	the	phenomenal	world.
2.	The	holy	sages	were	able	 to	survey	all	 the	movements	under	heaven.	They	contemplated	 the

way	in	which	these	movements	met	and	became	interrelated,	to	take	their	course	according	to	eternal
laws.	 Then	 they	 appended	 judgments,	 to	 distinguish	 between	 the	 good	 fortune	 and	 misfortune
indicated.	These	were	called	the	Judgments.
The	 last	word,	 “Judgments,”	 is	 actually	 “lines”	 in	 the	 text.	 The	 present	 translation	 incorporates	 the

correction	made	by	Hu	Shih	in	his	history	of	Chinese	philosophy,1	because	it	brings	out	more	clearly	the
contrast	between	Image	and	Judgment	that	is	found	also	in	other	passages	of	the	Book	of	Changes.

3.	They	speak	of	the	most	confused	diversities	without	arousing	aversion.	They	speak	of	what	is
most	mobile	without	causing	confusion.

4.	 This	 comes	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 they	 observed	 before	 they	 spoke	 and	 discussed	 before	 they
moved.	Through	observation	and	discussion	they	perfected	the	changes	and	transformations.
These	two	sections	present	again	the	contrast	between	the	observation	 in	the	Image,	which	gives	us

knowledge	of	the	diversities	of	things,	and	the	discussion	in	the	Judgment,	which	gives	us	knowledge	of
the	directions	of	movement.	We	have	here	comments	on	the	theory	of	the	simple	as	the	root	of	diversity	in
form	(in	conformity	with	the	Receptive)	and	of	the	easy	as	the	root	of	all	movement	(in	conformity	with
the	 Creative),	 as	 given	 in	 chapter	 1	 (secs.	 6	 et	 seq.).	 The	 following	 sections	 (fragments	 of	 a	 detailed
commentary	on	the	individual	lines)	give	examples.

5.	 “A	crane	calling	 in	 the	shade.	 Its	young	answers	 it.	 I	have	a	good	goblet.	 I	will	 share	 it	with
you.”

The	Master	said:	The	superior	man	abides	in	his	room.	If	his	words	are	well	spoken,	he	meets	with
assent	 at	 a	 distance	 of	 more	 than	 a	 thousand	 miles.	 How	 much	 more	 then	 from	 near	 by!	 If	 the
superior	man	abides	in	his	room	and	his	words	are	not	well	spoken,	he	meets	with	contradiction	at	a
distance	 of	more	 than	 a	 thousand	miles.	How	much	more	 then	 from	near	 by!	Words	 go	 forth	 from
one’s	own	person	and	exert	their	influence	on	men.	Deeds	are	born	close	at	hand	and	become	visible
far	away.	Words	and	deeds	are	the	hinge	and	bowspring	of	the	superior	man.	As	hinge	and	bowspring
move,	 they	bring	honor	or	disgrace.	Through	words	and	deeds	the	superior	man	moves	heaven	and
earth.	Must	one	not,	then,	be	cautious?
Compare	book	I,	hexagram	61,	Chung	Fu,	INNER	TRUTH,	nine	in	the	second	place,	comment	on	the

subject	of	speaking.
6.	“Men	bound	in	fellowship	first	weep	and	lament,	but	afterward	they	laugh.”
The	Master	said:
Life	leads	the	thoughtful	man	on	a	path	of	many	windings.
Now	the	course	is	checked,	now	it	runs	straight	again.



Here	winged	thoughts	may	pour	freely	forth	in	words,
There	the	heavy	burden	of	knowledge	must	be	shut	away	in	silence.
But	when	two	people	are	at	one	in	their	inmost	hearts,
They	shatter	even	the	strength	of	iron	or	of	bronze.
And	when	two	people	understand	each	other	in	their	inmost	hearts,
Their	words	are	sweet	and	strong,	like	the	fragrance	of	orchids.

Compare	book	I,	hexagram	13,	T’ung	Jên,	FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN,	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	comment
on	the	subject	of	speaking.

7.	“To	spread	white	rushes	underneath.	No	blame.”
The	Master	said:	It	does	well	enough	simply	to	place	something	on	the	floor.	But	if	one	puts	white

rushes	underneath,	how	could	that	be	a	mistake?	This	is	the	extreme	of	caution.	Rushes	in	themselves
are	worthless,	but	they	can	have	a	very	important	effect.	If	one	is	as	cautious	as	this	in	all	that	one
does,	one	remains	free	of	mistakes.
Compare	 book	 III,	 hexagram	 28,	 Ta	 Kuo,	 PREPONDERANCE	OF	 THE	GREAT,	 six	 at	 the	 beginning,

comment	on	action.
8.	“A	superior	man	of	modesty	and	merit	carries	things	to	conclusion.	Good	fortune.”
The	Master	said:	When	a	man	does	not	boast	of	his	efforts	and	does	not	count	his	merits	a	virtue,

he	is	a	man	of	great	parts.	It	means	that	for	all	his	merits	he	subordinates	himself	to	others.	Noble	of
nature,	reverent	in	his	conduct,	the	modest	man	is	full	of	merit,	and	therefore	he	is	able	to	maintain
his	position.
Compare	book	III,	hexagram	15,	Ch’ien,	MODESTY,	nine	in	the	third	place,	comment	on	action.

9.	“Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.”
The	Master	said:	He	who	is	noble	and	has	no	corresponding	position,	he	who	stands	high	and	has

no	following,	he	who	has	able	people	under	him	who	do	not	have	his	support,	that	man	will	have	cause
for	regret	at	every	turn.
Compare	 book	 III,	 hexagram	 1,	 Ch’ien,	 THE	 CREATIVE,	 nine	 at	 the	 top,	 comment	 on	 action.	 The

citation	 there	 from	the	Wên	Yen2	 contains	 this	passage,	obviously	 from	the	same	commentary,	word	 for
word.

10.	“Not	going	out	of	the	door	and	the	courtyard	is	without	blame.”
The	Master	said:	Where	disorder	develops,	words	are	the	first	steps.	If	the	prince	is	not	discreet,

he	 loses	 his	 servant.	 If	 the	 servant	 is	 not	 discreet,	 he	 loses	 his	 life.	 If	 germinating	 things	 are	 not
handled	with	discretion,	the	perfecting	of	them	is	impeded.	Therefore	the	superior	man	is	careful	to
maintain	silence	and	does	not	go	forth.
Compare	book	I,	hexagram	60,	Chieh,	LIMITATION,	nine	at	the	beginning,	comment	on	speaking.

11.	The	Master	said:	The	authors	of	the	Book	of	Changes	knew	what	robbers	are	like.	In	the	Book
of	Changes	it	is	said:	“If	a	man	carries	a	burden	on	his	back	and	nonetheless	rides	in	a	carriage,	he
thereby	 encourages	 robbers	 to	 draw	 near.”	 Carrying	 a	 burden	 on	 the	 back	 is	 the	 business	 of	 a
common	man;	a	carriage	is	the	appurtenance	of	a	man	of	rank.	Now,	when	a	common	man	uses	the
appurtenance	of	 a	man	of	 rank,	 robbers	plot	 to	 take	 it	 away	 from	him.	 If	 a	man	 is	 insolent	 toward
those	 above	 him	 and	 hard	 toward	 those	 below	 him,	 robbers	 plot	 to	 attack	 him.	 Carelessness	 in
guarding	things	tempts	thieves	to	steal.	Sumptuous	ornaments	worn	by	a	maiden	are	an	enticement	to
rob	her	of	her	virtue.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	 is	said:	“If	a	man	carries	a	burden	on	his	back	and
nonetheless	rides	in	a	carriage,	he	thereby	encourages	robbers	to	draw	near.”	For	that	is	an	invitation
to	robbers.
Compare	book	I,	hexagram	40,	Hsieh,	DELIVERANCE,	six	in	the	third	place,	comment	on	action.

CHAPTER	IX.	On	the	Oracle
1.	Heaven	 is	 one,	 earth	 is	 two;	 heaven	 is	 three,	 earth	 four;	 heaven	 is	 five,	 earth	 six;	 heaven	 is

seven,	earth	eight;	heaven	is	nine,	earth	ten.
In	 the	 traditional	 form	of	 the	 text,	 this	section	comes	 just	before	chapter	X.	 It	was	 transposed	to	 its

present	 position	 by	 Ch’êng	 Tzu	 in	 the	 Sung	 period	 and	 joined	 with	 the	 section	 that	 follows,	 which
originally	 came	 after	 section	 3.	 The	 two	 sections	 undoubtedly	 belong	 together,	 but	 they	 are	 only	 very
loosely	 connected	with	 what	 follows.	 They	 contain	 speculations	 about	 numbers	 similar	 to	 those	 in	 the
section	entitled	Hung	Fan1	in	the	Book	of	History	[Shu	Ching].	Probably	they	represent	the	beginning	of
the	connection	between	the	number	speculations	of	the	Book	of	History	and	the	yin-yang	doctrine	of	the
Book	of	Changes,	which	played	an	important	role	in	Chinese	thought	especially	under	the	Han	dynasty.	To
understand	 this	 connection,	 which	 can	 be	 mentioned	 here	 only	 in	 passing,	 we	 must	 go	 back	 to	 the
diagram	known	as	Ho	T’u,	 the	Yellow	River	Map,	said	 to	have	originated	with	Fu	Hsi	 [fig.	4].	This	map
shows	 the	development	out	of	even	and	odd	numbers	of	 the	“five	 stages	of	 change”	 (wu	hsing,	 usually
incorrectly	called	“elements”).



Figure	4
Water	in	the	north	has	sprung	from	the	one	of	heaven,	which	is	complemented	by	the	six	of	earth.	Fire

in	the	south	has	sprung	from	the	two	of	earth,	which	is	complemented	by	the	seven	of	heaven.	“Wood	in
the	east	has	sprung	from	the	three	of	heaven,	which	is	complemented	by	the	eight	of	earth.	Metal	in	the
west	has	sprung	from	the	four	of	earth,	which	is	complemented	by	the	nine	of	heaven.	Earth	in	the	middle
(t’u,	the	soil,	the	earth	substance	as	distinguished	from	ti,	the	earth	as	a	heavenly	body)	has	sprung	from
the	five	of	heaven,	which	is	complemented	by	the	ten	of	earth.

The	second	arrangement,	according	to	which	the	numbers	separate	again	and	combine	with	the	eight
trigrams,	is	that	of	the	Lo	Shu,	the	Writing	from	the	River	Lo	[fig.	5].

Figure	5
2.	 There	 are	 five	 heavenly	 numbers.	 There	 are	 also	 five	 earthly	 numbers.	 When	 they	 are

distributed	among	 the	 five	places,	 each	 finds	 its	 complement.	 The	 sum	of	 the	heavenly	numbers	 is
twenty-five,	 that	 of	 the	 earthly	 numbers	 is	 thirty.	 The	 sum	 total	 of	 heavenly	 numbers	 and	 earthly
numbers	is	fifty-five.	It	is	this	which	completes	the	changes	and	transformations	and	sets	demons	and
gods	in	movement.
No	further	comment	is	needed	in	explanation	of	this.	Like	section	1,	it	undoubtedly	belongs	to	a	later

period.
3.	The	number	of	the	total	is	fifty.	Of	these,	forty-nine	are	used.	They	are	divided	into	two	portions,

to	represent	the	two	primal	forces.	Hereupon	one	is	set	apart,	to	represent	the	three	powers.	They	are
counted	through	by	fours,	to	represent	the	four	seasons.	The	remainder	is	put	aside,	to	represent	the
intercalary	 month.	 There	 are	 two	 intercalary	 months	 in	 five	 years,	 therefore	 the	 putting	 aside	 is
repeated,	and	this	gives	us	the	whole.
Here	 the	 process	 of	 consulting	 the	 oracle	 is	 brought	 into	 relation	 with	 cosmic	 processes.	 The

procedure	in	consulting	the	oracle	is	as	follows:
One	takes	fifty	yarrow	stalks,	of	which	only	forty-nine	are	used.	These	forty-nine	are	first	divided	into

two	heaps	[at	random],	then	a	stalk	from	the	right-hand	heap	is	inserted	between	the	ring	finger	and	the
little	finger	of	the	left	hand.	The	left	heap	is	counted	through	by	fours,	and	the	remainder	(four	or	less)	is
inserted	between	the	ring	finger	and	the	middle	finger.	The	same	thing	is	done	with	the	right	heap,	and
the	remainder	inserted	between	the	forefinger	and	the	middle	finger.	This	constitutes	one	change.	Now
one	is	holding	in	one’s	hand	either	five	or	nine	stalks	in	all.	The	two	remaining	heaps	are	put	together,	and
the	same	process	is	repeated	twice.	These	second	and	third	times,	one	obtains	either	four	or	eight	stalks.
The	five	stalks	of	the	first	counting	and	the	four	of	each	of	the	succeeding	countings	are	regarded	as	a
unit	having	the	numerical	value	three;	the	nine	stalks	of	the	first	counting	and	the	eight	of	the	succeeding
countings	have	the	numerical	value	two.	When	three	successive	changes	produce	the	sum	3	+	3	+	3	=	9,
this	makes	the	old	yang,	i.e.,	a	firm	line	that	moves.	The	sum	2	+	2	+	2	=	6	makes	the	old	yin,	a	yielding
line	 that	moves.	Seven	 is	 the	 young	yang,	 and	eight	 the	 young	yin;	 they	are	not	 taken	 into	account	as
individual	lines	(cf.	the	section	on	consulting	the	oracle	in	Appendix	I).

4.	The	numbers	that	yield	THE	CREATIVE	total	216;	those	which	yield	THE	RECEPTIVE	total	144,
making	in	all	360.	They	correspond	to	the	days	of	the
When	THE	CREATIVE	is	made	up	of	six	old	ying	yang	lines,	that	is,	of	nines	only,	the	following	numbers

result	when	the	oracle	is	consulted
Total	number	of	stalks	49



Subtracted	the	first	time	5	+	4	+	4	=	13
36

When	this	is	repeated	six	times	(for	the	six	lines),	the	total	of	the	six	remainders	(36	x	6)	is	216	stalks.
When	THE	RECEPTIVE	consists	of	sixes	only—that	is,	of	old	yin	lines—the	following	numbers	result.

Total	number	of	stalks	49
Subtracted	for	a	six	(old	yin)	9	+	8	+	8	=	25

24
When	this	has	been	done	six	times	(for	the	six	lines	of	a	hexagram),	the	total	of	the	remainders	(24	x	6)

is	 144	 stalks.	 If	 now	 one	 adds	 together	 the	 numbers	 obtained	 for	 THE	 CREATIVE	 and	 the	 numbers
obtained	for	THE	RECEPTIVE,	the	result	is	216	+	144	=	360,	which	corresponds	with	the	average	number
of	days	in	the	Chinese	year.2

5.	 The	 numbers	 of	 the	 stalks	 in	 the	 two	 parts	 amount	 to	 11,520,	 which	 corresponds	 with	 the
number	of	the	ten	thousand	things.
In	the	whole	of	the	Book	of	Changes	there	are	192	lines	of	each	kind—in	all,	384	lines	(64	x	6),	of	which

half	are	yang	and	half	yin.	As	has	been	shown	in	the	section	above,	after	a	moving	yang	line	is	obtained
there	remain	thirty-six	stalks,	so	that	we	have	altogether	192	x	36	=	6912.	Each	of	the	moving	yin	lines
yields	a	remainder	of	twenty-four	stalks:	192	x	24	=	4608.	Together,	6912	+	4608	=	11,520.

6.	 Therefore	 four	 operations	 are	 required	 to	 produce	 a	 change;	 eighteen	 mutations	 yield	 a
hexagram.
The	words	“change”	and	“mutation”	are	used	here	 in	 the	same	sense.	Each	 line,	as	shown	above,	 is

composed	of	three	mutations	or	changes.	The	four	operations	are:	(1)	dividing	the	stalks	into	two	heaps;
(2)	taking	up	one	stalk	and	inserting	this	between	the	ring	finger	and	the	little	finger;	(3)	counting	off	the
left-hand	heap	by	 fours	and	 inserting	 the	remainder	between	 the	ring	 finger	and	 the	middle	 finger;	 (4)
counting	 off	 the	 right-hand	 heap	 by	 fours	 and	 inserting	 the	 remainder	 between	 the	 forefinger	 and	 the
middle	finger.	These	four	operations	yield	one	change	or	mutation—that	is	to	say,	the	numerical	value	two
or	three	(see	above).	When	this	change	is	carried	out	three	times,	one	obtains	the	value	of	the	line,	either
a	six	or	a	seven,	an	eight	or	a	nine.	Six	lines	(3	changes	x	6	=	18	changes)	produce	the	structure	of	the
hexagram.

7.	The	eight	signs	constitute	each	a	small	completion.
The	 hexagram	 is	 made	 up	 of	 two	 trigrams.	 The	 “eight	 signs”	 are	 the	 eight	 primary	 trigrams.	 In	 a

hexagram	the	lower	trigram	is	also	called	the	inner,	and	the	upper	trigram	is	also	called	the	outer.
8.	When	we	 continue	 and	go	 further	 and	 add	 to	 the	 situations	 all	 their	 transitions,	 all	 possible

situations	on	earth	are	encompassed.
Each	of	the	sixty-four	hexagrams	can	change	into	another	through	the	appropriate	movement	of	one	or

more	 lines.	 Thus	we	 arrive	 at	 a	 total	 (64	 x	 64)	 of	 4096	 transitional	 stages,	 and	 these	 represent	 every
possible	situation.

9.	 It	 reveals	 tao	 and	 renders	 nature	 and	 action	 divine.	 Therefore	 with	 its	 help	 we	 can	 meet
everything	in	the	right	way,	and	with	its	help	can	even	assist	the	gods	themselves.
This	 section	 refers	 again	 to	 the	Book	 of	Changes	 in	 general.	 Its	 theme	 is	 that	 the	 book	 reveals	 the

meaning	of	events	in	the	universe	and	thereby	imparts	a	divine	mystery	to	the	nature	and	action	of	the
man	who	puts	his	trust	in	it,	so	that	he	is	enabled	to	meet	every	event	in	the	right	way	and	even	to	aid	the
gods	in	governing	the	world.

10.	The	Master	said:	Whoever	knows	the	tao	of	the	changes	and	transformations,	knows	the	action
of	the	gods.

CHAPTER	X.	The	Fourfold	Use	of	the	Book	of	Changes
1.	The	Book	of	Changes	contains	a	fourfold	tao	of	the	holy	sages.	In	speaking,	we	should	be	guided

by	 its	 judgments;	 in	 action,	 we	 should	 be	 guided	 by	 its	 changes;	 in	making	 objects,	 we	 should	 be
guided	by	its	images;	in	seeking	an	oracle,	we	should	be	guided	by	its	pronouncements.

2.	Therefore	the	superior	man,	whenever	he	has	to	make	or	do	something,	consults	the	Changes,
and	he	does	so	 in	words.	 It	 takes	up	his	communications	 like	an	echo;	neither	 far	nor	near,	neither
dark	nor	deep	exist	for	it,	and	thus	he	learns	of	the	things	of	the	future.	If	this	book	were	not	the	most
spiritual	thing	on	earth,	how	could	it	do	this?
Here	the	psychological	basis	of	the	oracle	is	described.	The	person	consulting	the	oracle	formulates	his

problem	precisely	 in	words,	and	regardless	of	whether	 it	concerns	something	distant	or	near,	secret	or
profound,	he	receives—as	though	it	were	an	echo—the	appropriate	oracle,	which	enables	him	to	know	the
future.	This	 rests	on	 the	assumption	 that	 the	conscious	and	 the	supraconscious	enter	 into	 relationship.
The	conscious	process	stops	with	the	 formulation	of	 the	question.	The	unconscious	process	begins	with
the	division	 of	 the	 yarrow	 stalks,	 and	when	we	 compare	 the	 result	 of	 this	 division	with	 the	 text	 of	 the
book,	we	obtain	the	oracle.

3.	 The	 three	 and	 five	 operations	 are	 undertaken	 in	 order	 to	 obtain	 a	 change.	 Divisions	 and
combinations	of	the	numbers	are	made.	If	one	proceeds	through	the	changes,	they	complete	the	forms
of	heaven	and	earth.	If	the	number	of	changes	is	increased	to	the	utmost,	they	determine	all	images
on	earth.	If	this	were	not	the	most	changing	thing	on	earth,	how	could	it	do	this?
A	great	deal	has	been	said	about	the	“three	and	five”	divisions,	and	even	Chu	Hsi1	is	of	the	opinion	that

the	passage	is	no	longer	comprehensible.	But	we	need	only	take	as	a	basis	chapter	IX,	section	3,	which
the	 passage	 above	 serves	 to	 explain	 further,	 in	 order	 to	 establish	 coherence	 in	 the	 text.	 The	 “three”
operations	are	the	division	into	two	heaps	and	the	special	disposition	of	a	single	stalk,	“to	represent	the
three	 powers.”	 After	 this	 each	 of	 the	 two	 heaps	 is	 counted	 through	 by	 fours,	 because	 “there	 are	 two



intercalary	months	in	five	years,”	and	thus	we	arrive	at	three	plus	two,	i.e.,	five	operations,	which	yield
one	 change.	We	 proceed	 in	 this	 way	with	 divisions	 and	 combinations	 until	 we	 “complete	 the	 forms	 of
heaven	and	earth,”	that	is,	until	we	obtain,	as	a	first	result,	one	of	the	eight	primary	trigrams	or	a	“small
completion”	 (cf.	 chapter	 IX,	 sec.	 7).	 Continuing	 until	 the	 topmost	 or	 sixth	 line	 is	 reached,	we	 obtain	 a
complete	image,	which	is	always	composed	of	two	trigrams.

4.	The	Changes	have	no	consciousness,	no	action;	they	are	quiescent	and	do	not	move.	But	if	they
are	stimulated,	they	penetrate	all	situations	under	heaven.	If	they	were	not	the	most	divine	thing	on
earth,	how	could	they	do	this?
Here	we	have	a	plain	statement	of	what	has	been	brought	out	in	the	remarks	on	section	2.2

5.	The	Changes	are	what	has	enabled	the	holy	sages	to	reach	all	depths	and	to	grasp	the	seeds	of
all	things.

6.	Only	through	what	is	deep	can	one	penetrate	all	wills	on	earth.	Only	through	the	seeds	can	one
complete	all	affairs	on	earth.	Only	through	the	divine	can	one	hurry	without	haste	and	reach	the	goal
without	walking.
Here	it	is	shown	that	because	the	Book	of	Changes	reaches	down	into	the	regions	of	the	unconscious,

both	space	and	time	are	eliminated.	Space,	as	the	principle	of	diversity	and	confusion,	is	overcome	by	the
deep,	the	simple.	Time,	as	the	principle	of	uncertainty,	is	overcome	by	the	easy,	the	germinal.

7.	When	the	Master	said,	“The	Book	of	Changes	contains	a	fourfold	tao	of	the	holy	sages,”	this	is
what	is	meant.
It	 may	 be	 assumed	 that	 section	 1	 is	 based	 on	 a	 saying	 of	 Confucius	 that	 has	 been	 rhetorically

elaborated	and	is	once	more	summarized	here.
CHAPTER	XI.	On	the	Yarrow	Stalks	and	the	Hexagrams	and	Lines
1.	The	Master	said:	The	Changes,	what	do	they	do?	The	Changes	disclose	things,	complete	affairs,

and	encompass	all	ways	on	earth—this	and	nothing	else.	For	this	reason	the	holy	sages	used	them	to
penetrate	all	wills	on	earth	and	to	determine	all	fields	of	action	on	earth,	and	to	settle	all	doubts	on
earth.
Here	again	we	have	a	saying	of	the	Master	placed	at	the	head	of	a	chapter	which	then	develops	and

interprets	it.
2.	Therefore	the	nature	of	the	yarrow	stalks	is	round	and	spiritual.	The	nature	of	the	hexagrams	is

square	and	wise.	The	meaning	of	the	six	lines	changes,	in	order	to	furnish	information.
In	this	way	the	holy	sages	purified	their	hearts,	withdrew,	and	hid	themselves	in	the	secret.	They

concerned	 themselves	 with	 good	 fortune	 and	 misfortune	 in	 common	 with	 other	 men.	 They	 were
divine,	hence	they	knew	the	future;	they	were	wise,	hence	they	stored	up	the	past.	Who	is	it	that	can
do	all	this?	Only	the	reason	and	clear-mindedness	of	the	ancients,	their	knowledge	and	wisdom,	their
unremitting	divine	power.
Here	the	triplicity	of	the	first	section	is	consistently	carried	further.	Penetration	of	all	wills	is	paralleled

with	the	spirituality	of	the	yarrow	stalks:	they	are	round	because	they	are	symbols	of	heaven	and	of	the
spirit.	Their	basic	number	is	seven,	their	total	number	is	forty-nine	(7	x	7).	The	hexagrams	stand	for	the
earth;	 their	basic	number	 is	eight,	 their	 total	number	 is	 sixty-four	 (8	x	8).	They	serve	 to	determine	 the
field	of	action.	Finally,	the	individual	lines	are	movable	and	changeable	(their	basic	numbers	are	nine	and
six),	in	order	to	give	information	and	to	settle	doubts	pertaining	to	particular	situations.

The	 holy	 sages	were	 possessed	 of	 this	 knowledge.	 They	withdrew	 into	 seclusion	 and	 cultivated	 the
spirit,	so	that	they	were	able	to	penetrate	the	minds	of	all	men	(penetration),	so	that	they	could	determine
good	 fortune	 and	 misfortune	 (the	 field	 of	 action),	 and	 so	 that	 they	 knew	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future
(settlement	 of	 doubts).	 They	 could	do	 this	 thanks	 to	 their	 reason	 and	 clear-mindedness	 (penetration	 of
wills),	 their	 knowledge	 and	 wisdom	 (determination	 of	 the	 field	 of	 action),	 and	 their	 divine	 power
(settlement	of	doubts).	This	divine	power	to	battle	(shên	wu)	acts	without	weakening	itself	(this	is	a	better
reading	than	“without	killing”).

3.	 Therefore	 they	 fathomed	 the	 tao	 of	 heaven	and	understood	 the	 situations	 of	men.	Thus	 they
invented	these	divine	things	in	order	to	meet	the	need	of	men.	The	holy	sages	fasted	for	this	reason,	in
order	to	make	their	natures	divinely	clear.
Because	these	wise	men	knew	equally	well	the	laws	of	the	universe	and	what	was	needful	to	man,	they

invented	the	use	of	 the	oracle	stalks—“these	divine	things”—in	order	thus	to	answer	 the	needs	of	men.
And	 so	 they	 concentrated	 their	 thoughts	 in	 holy	meditation	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 attaining	 the	 necessary
power	 and	 fullness	 of	 being.	 Therefore	 the	 understanding	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 calls	 for	 a	 similar
concentration	and	meditation.

4.	Therefore	they	called	the	closing	of	 the	gates	the	Receptive,	and	the	opening	of	 the	gate	the
Creative.	 The	 alternation	 between	 closing	 and	 opening	 they	 called	 change.	 The	 going	 forward	 and
backward	without	ceasing	they	called	penetration.	What	manifests	itself	visibly	they	called	an	image;
what	has	bodily	form	they	called	a	tool.	What	is	established	in	usage	they	called	a	pattern.	That	which
furthers	on	going	out	and	coming	in,	that	which	all	men	live	by,	they	called	the	divine.
In	this	passage	are	shown	the	tao	of	heaven	and	the	conditions	of	men	as	recognized	by	the	holy	sages.

The	closing	and	the	opening	of	the	gates	signify	the	alternation	of	rest	and	movement.	These	are	likewise
two	 conditions	 pertaining	 to	 yoga	 practice	 that	 are	 attainable	 only	 through	 individual	 training.
Penetration	is	that	state	in	which	the	individual	has	attained	sovereign	mastery	in	the	psychic	sphere	as
well	and	is	able	to	move	forward	and	backward	in	time.	The	next	sentences	show	how	the	material	world
arises.	First	of	all	there	is	a	pre-existent	image,	an	idea;	then	a	copy	of	this	archetypal	image	takes	shape
as	 a	 corporeal	 form.	 That	 which	 regulates	 this	 process	 of	 imitation	 is	 a	 pattern;	 and	 the	 force	 that



generates	these	processes	is	the	divine	principle.	Many	parallels	to	these	expositions	are	to	be	found	in
Lao-tse.

5.	Therefore	there	is	in	the	Changes	the	Great	Primal	Beginning.	This	generates	the	two	primary
forces.	 The	 two	 primary	 forces	 generate	 the	 four	 images.	 The	 four	 images	 generate	 the	 eight
trigrams.
The	 Great	 Primal	 Beginning,	 t’ai	 chi,	 plays	 an	 important	 role	 in	 later	 Chinese	 natural	 philosophy.

Originally	chi	is	the	ridgepole—a	simple	line	symbolizing	the	positing	of	oneness	(———).	This	positing	of
oneness	 implies	 also	 a	 positing	 of	 duality,	 an	 above	 and	 a	 below.	 The	 conditioning	 element	 is	 further
designated	as	an	undivided	line,	while	the	conditioned	element	is	represented	by	means	of	a	divided	line
(—	—).	These	are	the	two	polar	primary	forces	later	designated	as	yang,	the	bright	principle,	and	yin,	the
dark.	Then,	through	doubling,	there	arise	the	four	images:

These	correspond	with	the	four	seasons	of	the	year.	Through	addition	of	another	line,	there	arise	the
eight	trigrams:

The	same	procedure	is	mentioned	in	chapter	42	of	Lao-tse.
6.	The	eight	trigrams	determine	good	fortune	and	misfortune.	Good	fortune	and	misfortune	create

the	great	field	of	action.
The	“great	field	of	action”	are	the	regulations	and	rules	instituted	by	the	sages	in	order	to	obtain	good

fortune	for	men	and	to	avoid	misfortune.
7.	Therefore:	There	are	no	greater	primal	images	than	heaven	and	earth.	There	is	nothing	that	has

more	movement	or	greater	cohesion	than	the	four	seasons.	Of	the	images	suspended	in	the	heavens,
there	is	none	more	light-giving	than	the	sun	and	the	moon.	Of	the	honored	and	highly	placed,	there	is
none	 greater	 than	 he	who	 possesses	wealth	 and	 rank.	With	 respect	 to	 creating	 things	 for	 use	 and
making	 tools	 helpful	 to	 the	 whole	 world,	 there	 is	 no	 one	 greater	 than	 the	 holy	 sages.	 For
comprehending	 the	 chaotic	 diversity	 of	 things	 and	 exploring	 what	 is	 hidden,	 for	 penetrating	 the
depths	and	extending	influence	afar,	thereby	determining	good	fortune	and	misfortune	on	earth	and
consummating	all	efforts	on	earth,	there	is	nothing	greater	than	the	oracle.
As	in	chapter	25	of	Lao-tse,	where	the	four	great	things	in	the	universe	are	discussed,	the	great	things

in	nature	and	in	the	world	of	men	are	here	named	together.	Heaven	and	earth	offer	the	archetypal	image
to	 be	 imitated.	 Among	 all	 things,	 the	 seasons	 have	 the	 most	 movement	 and	 the	 greatest	 degree	 of
cohesion;	the	brightest	are	the	sun	and	the	moon.

On	earth	the	most	exalted	person	is	the	king	of	men,	the	sage	on	the	throne,	who,	wealthy	and	noble
himself,	 is	 at	 the	 same	 time	 the	 source	of	wealth	 and	nobility.	His	helpers	 are,	 first,	 the	 active	man	of
wisdom,	 directing	 and	 inventing,	 and,	 second,	 the	 oracle,	 which,	 corresponding	 with	 the	 light-giving
images,	the	sun	and	moon,	clarifies	and	illumines	all	conditions	on	earth.

8.	Therefore:	Heaven	creates	divine	things;	the	holy	sage	takes	them	as	models.	Heaven	and	earth
change	 and	 transform;	 the	 holy	 sage	 imitates	 them.	 In	 the	 heavens	 hang	 images	 that	 reveal	 good
fortune	and	misfortune;	the	holy	sage	reproduces	these.	The	Yellow	River	brought	forth	a	map	and	the
Lo	River	brought	forth	a	writing;	the	holy	men	took	these	as	models.
In	this	section	the	parallel	between	the	processes	in	the	macrocosm	and	the	works	of	the	holy	sages	is

elaborated.	The	divine	 things	created	by	heaven	and	earth	are	presumably	 the	natural	phenomena	that
the	holy	men	reproduced	in	the	eight	trigrams.	According	to	another	view,	tortoises	and	yarrow	stalks	are
meant.	The	changes	and	transformations	manifesting	themselves	in	day	and	night,	and	in	the	seasons	of
the	year,	are	reproduced	in	the	character	of	the	changes	in	the	lines.	The	signs	in	the	heavens	meaning
good	fortune	and	misfortune	are	the	sun,	moon,	and	stars,	together	with	comets,	eclipses,	and	the	like.
They	are	reproduced	in	the	appended	judgments	on	good	fortune	and	misfortune.

The	last	sentence	of	the	section,	referring	to	two	legendary	events	occurring	in	the	time	of	Fu	Hsi	and
Yü1	respectively,	is	a	later	addition	and	has	had	a	disastrous	effect	on	the	exegesis	of	the	Book	of	Changes.
Reproductions	of	 the	 two	diagrams	are	given	 in	 the	explanation	of	chapter	 IX,	 section	1.	That	 this	 is	 a
later	addition	is	proven	by	the	fact	that	sections	7,	8,	9	of	the	present	chapter	all	deal	with	the	threefold
parallelism	between	nature	 and	 the	world	 of	man	broached	 in	 section	 1,	 and	 this	 addendum	creates	 a
break	in	the	continuity	of	thought.

9.	In	the	Changes	there	are	images,	in	order	to	reveal;	there	are	judgments	appended,	in	order	to
interpret;	good	fortune	and	misfortune	are	determined,	in	order	to	decide.
The	 text	 says	 “four”	 images;	 this	 is	 carried	 over	 by	 error	 from	 section	5.	Here	 “images”	means	 the

eight	trigrams,	which	show	situations	in	their	interrelation.	This	corresponds	with	the	archetypal	images
of	heaven.	The	judgments	appended	to	the	lines	indicate	the	changes	corresponding	with	the	changes	in
the	 seasons.	Finally,	 the	decisions	about	good	 fortune	and	misfortune	 correspond	with	 the	 signs	 in	 the
heavens.

CHAPTER	XII.	Summary
1.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“He	is	blessed	by	heaven.	Good	fortune.	Nothing	that	does	not

further.”
The	Master	said:	To	bless	means	to	help.	Heaven	helps	the	man	who	is	devoted;	men	help	the	man

who	is	true.	He	who	walks	in	truth	and	is	devoted	in	his	thinking,	and	furthermore	reveres	the	worthy,
is	blessed	by	heaven.	He	has	good	fortune,	and	there	is	nothing	that	would	not	further.



This	is	a	passage	from	the	body	of	the	commentary	on	the	individual	lines,	fragments	of	which	appear
in	chapter	VIII,	sections	5-11.	It	serves	to	amplify	the	close	of	section	6	of	chapter	II,	but	it	does	not	fit	the
context	here.

2.	 The	 Master	 said:	 Writing	 cannot	 express	 words	 completely.	 Words	 cannot	 express	 thoughts
completely.

Are	we	then	unable	to	see	the	thoughts	of	the	holy	sages?
The	Master	said:	The	holy	sages	set	up	the	images	in	order	to	express	their	thoughts	completely;

they	devised	the	hexagrams	in	order	to	express	the	true	and	the	false	completely.	Then	they	appended
judgments	and	so	could	express	their	words	completely.

(They	created	change	and	continuity,	to	show	the	advantage	completely;	they	urged	on,	they	set	in
motion,	to	set	forth	the	spirit	completely.)
This	section	gives	in	dialogue	form,	after	the	manner	of	the	Lun	Yü	[Analects],	a	judgment	on	the	mode

of	expression	of	the	Book	of	Changes.	The	Master	has	said	that	writing	never	expresses	words	completely
and	that	words	never	express	thoughts	completely.	A	pupil	asks	whether	one	can	never	gain	a	clear	view
of	what	 the	sages	 thought	and	 the	Master	uses	 the	Book	of	Changes	 to	show	how	 it	may	be	done.	The
sages	set	up	the	 images	and	hexagrams	 in	order	to	show	the	situations,	and	then	appended	the	words:
these,	in	conjunction	with	the	images,	may	actually	be	taken	as	the	complete	expression	of	their	thoughts.

The	 two	 final	 statements	 [in	 parentheses]	 have	 been	 transposed	 to	 this	 section	 from	 some	 other
context,	probably	because	of	the	similar	rhetorical	construction	(cf.	sec.	4,	second	half,	and	sec.	7).

3.	The	Creative	and	the	Receptive	are	the	real	secret	of	the	Changes.	Inasmuch	as	the	Creative
and	the	Receptive	present	themselves	as	complete,	the	changes	between	them	are	also	posited.	If	the
Creative	and	the	Receptive	were	destroyed,	 there	would	be	nothing	by	which	the	changes	could	be
perceived.	 If	 there	were	no	more	changes	 to	be	seen,	 the	effects	of	 the	Creative	and	the	Receptive
would	also	gradually	cease.
The	changes	are	thought	of	here	as	natural	processes,	practically	identical	with	life.	Life	depends	on

the	polarity	between	activity	and	receptivity.	This	maintains	tension,	every	adjustment	of	which	manifests
itself	as	a	change,	a	process	in	life.	If	this	state	of	tension,	this	potential,	were	to	cease,	there	would	no
longer	 be	 a	 criterion	 for	 life—life	 could	 no	 longer	 express	 itself.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 these	 polar
oppositions,	 these	 tensions,	are	constantly	being	generated	anew	by	 the	changes	 inherent	of	 life.	 If	 life
should	 cease	 to	 express	 itself,	 these	 oppositions	 would	 be	 obliterated	 by	 progressive	 entropy,	 and	 the
death	of	the	world	would	ensue.

4.	Therefore:	What	is	above	form	is	called	tao;	what	is	within	form	is	called	tool.
We	are	shown	here	that	the	forces	constituting	the	visible	world	are	transcendent	ones.	Tao	is	taken

here	in	the	sense	of	an	all-embracing	entelechy.	It	transcends	the	spatial	world,	but	it	acts	upon	the	visible
world—by	means	of	the	images,	i.e.,	ideas	inherent	in	it,	as	is	set	forth	more	exactly	in	other	passages—
and	what	hereby	comes	 into	being	are	the	objects.	An	object	 is	spatial,	 that	 is,	defined	by	 its	corporeal
limits;	but	it	cannot	be	understood	without	knowledge	of	the	tao	underlying	it.

This	section,	like	section	2,	has	an	addition	that	reappears	in	large	part,	with	a	slight	textual	variation,
in	the	closing	section:

(That	which	transforms	things	and	fits	them	together	is	called	change;	that	which	stimulates	them
and	sets	them	in	motion	is	called	continuity.	That	which	raises	them	up	and	sets	them	forth	before	all
people	on	earth	is	called	the	field	of	action.)

5.	 Therefore,	with	 respect	 to	 the	 Images:	 The	 holy	 sages	were	 able	 to	 survey	 all	 the	 confused
diversities	under	heaven.	They	observed	forms	and	phenomena,	and	made	representations	of	things
and	 their	 attributes.	 These	 were	 called	 the	 Images.	 The	 holy	 sages	 were	 able	 to	 survey	 all	 the
movements	under	heaven.	They	 contemplated	 the	way	 in	which	 these	movements	met	 and	became
interrelated,	 to	 take	 their	 course	 according	 to	 eternal	 laws.	 Then	 they	 appended	 judgments,	 to
distinguish	between	the	good	fortune	and	misfortune	indicated.	These	were	called	the	Judgments.
This	section	is	a	literal	repetition	of	sections	1	and	2	of	chapter	VIII.

6.	 The	 exhaustive	 presentation	 of	 the	 confused	 diversities	 under	 heaven	 depends	 upon	 the
hexagrams.	The	stimulation	of	all	movements	under	heaven	depends	upon	the	Judgments.
There	 is	 some	 connection	 between	 this	 passage	 and	 section	 3	 of	 chapter	 VIII,	 while	 the	 following

section	contains	a	parallel	to	the	second	half	of	section	4	above.
7.	 The	 transformation	 of	 things	 and	 the	 fitting	 together	 of	 them	 depend	 upon	 the	 changes.

Stimulation	of	 them	and	setting	 them	 in	motion	depend	upon	continuity.	The	spirituality	and	clarity
depend	upon	the	right	man.	Silent	fulfillment,	confidence	that	needs	no	words,	depend	upon	virtuous
conduct.
Here,	in	conclusion,	the	intermeshing	of	the	Book	of	Changes	and	man	is	set	forth.	It	is	only	through	a

living	personality	that	the	words	of	the	book	ever	come	fully	to	life	and	then	exert	their	influence	upon	the
world.2

PART	II
CHAPTER	I.	On	the	Signs	and	Lines,	on	Creating	and	Acting
1.	The	eight	trigrams	are	arranged	according	to	completeness:	thus	the	images	are	contained	in

them.	Thereupon	they	are	doubled:	thus	the	lines	are	contained	in	them.
Compare	part	I,	chapter	II,	section	1.	The	sequence	in	the	order	of	completeness	is:	(1)	Ch’ien,	(2)	Tui,

(3)	Li,	(4)	Chên,	(5)	Sun,	(6)	K’an,	(7)	Kên,	(8)	K’un.	The	trigrams	contain	only	the	images	(ideas)	of	the
things	 they	 represent.	 It	 is	 only	 in	 the	 hexagrams	 that	 the	 individual	 lines	 come	 into	 consideration,
because	it	is	only	in	the	hexagrams	that	the	relationships	of	above	and	below,	within	and	without,	appear.

2.	The	firm	and	the	yielding	displace	each	other,	and	change	is	contained	therein.	The	judgments,



together	with	their	counsels,	are	appended,	and	movement	is	contained	therein.
Compare	part	 I,	chapter	 II,	 section	2.	Change	 (as	well	 as	 transformation)	 appears	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the

alternation	of	 firm	and	yielding	 lines.	The	 judgments	give	 their	 counsels	 through	 the	appended	oracles
—”Good	fortune,”	“Misfortune,”	and	so	on.

3.	Good	fortune	and	misfortune,	remorse	and	humiliation,	come	about	through	movement.
Compare	part	I,	chapter	II,	section	3.	Good	fortune	and	misfortune,	remorse	and	humiliation,	appear

only	as	a	result	of	conduct	of	a	corresponding	kind.
4.	The	firm	and	the	yielding	stand	firm	when	they	are	in	their	original	places.	Their	changes	and

continuities	should	correspond	with	the	time.
When	the	firm	lines	are	in	firm	places	and	the	yielding	lines	in	yielding	places,	a	state	of	equilibrium

exists.	However,	this	abstract	state	of	equilibrium	must	yield	to	change	and	reorganization	when	the	time
demands	 it.	The	time,	that	 is,	 the	total	situation	represented	by	a	hexagram,	plays	an	 important	role	 in
regard	to	the	positions	of	the	individual	lines.

5.	Good	 fortune	and	misfortune	 take	effect	 through	perseverance.	The	 tao	of	heaven	and	earth
becomes	 visible	 through	 perseverance.	 The	 tao	 of	 sun	 and	 moon	 becomes	 bright	 through
perseverance.	All	movements	under	heaven	become	uniform	through	perseverance.
The	secret	of	action	lies	in	duration.	Good	fortune	and	misfortune	are	slow	in	the	making.	Only	when	a

trend	 is	 followed	continuously	do	 the	 results	of	 single	actions	gradually	accumulate	 in	 such	a	way	 that
they	become	manifest	as	good	fortune	or	misfortune.	Similarly,	heaven	and	earth	are	the	results	of	lasting
conditions.	 In	 that	 all	 clear,	 luminous	 forces	 constantly	 rise	 upward,	 and	 all	 that	 is	 solid	 and	 turbid
constantly	sinks	downward,	the	cosmos	separates	itself	out	of	chaos—heaven	above	and	earth	below.	So	it
is	also	as	regards	the	course	of	the	sun	and	the	moon;	their	states	of	radiance	are	results	of	continuous
movements	and	conditions	of	equilibrium.	Thus	all	movements	and	actions	continued	over	a	long	period	of
time	channel	out	definite	courses,	which	then	become	laws.	According	to	this	view,	natural	laws	are	not
abstractions	 fixed	 once	 and	 for	 all,	 but	 sustained	 processes	 in	which	 the	 character	 of	 law	 appears	 the
more	definitely	the	longer	they	are	in	operation.

6.	 The	Creative	 is	 decided	 and	 therefore	 shows	 to	men	 the	 easy.	 The	Receptive	 is	 yielding	 and
therefore	shows	to	men	the	simple.
The	 two	 fundamental	 principles	 move	 according	 to	 the	 requirements	 of	 the	 time,	 so	 that	 they	 are

continuously	 undergoing	 change.	 But	 the	 nature	 of	 their	 movements	 is	 uniform	 and	 consistent.	 The
Creative	 is	 always	 strong,	 decided,	 real,	 hence	 it	meets	 with	 no	 difficulties.	 It	 always	 remains	 true	 to
itself;	hence	its	effortlessness.	Difficulties	always	indicate	vacillation	and	lack	of	clarity.	In	the	same	way	it
is	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 Receptive	 to	 be	 consistently	 yielding,	 to	 follow	 the	 line	 of	 least	 resistance,	 and
therefore	to	be	simple.	Complications	arise	only	from	an	inner	conflict	of	motives.

7.	The	lines	imitate	this.	The	images	reproduce	this.
Here	a	definition	of	the	lines	and	images	is	given.	In	Chinese	the	word	for	“line”	is	hsiao;	“to	imitate”	is

also	rendered	by	hsiao	(written	differently).	“Image”	and	“to	reproduce”	(in	the	sense	of	“to	represent”)
are	expressed	by	hsiang	(also	written	differently	in	each	case).	The	lines	imitate	in	their	changes	the	way
in	 which	 good	 fortune	 and	 misfortune	 arise	 in	 a	 movement	 by	 reason	 of	 its	 duration.	 The	 images
reproduce	 the	way	 in	which	all	 the	changes	and	 interrelations	of	 the	 firm	and	 the	yielding	 issue	 in	 the
easy	and	the	simple.

8.	The	lines	and	images	move	within,	and	good	fortune	and	misfortune	reveal	themselves	without.
The	work	 and	 the	 field	 of	 action	 reveal	 themselves	 in	 the	 changes.	 The	 feelings	 of	 the	 holy	 sages
reveal	themselves	in	the	judgments.
The	movements	of	the	lines	and	images,	and	of	the	infinitesimal	germs	of	events	symbolized	by	them,

are	invisible,	but	their	results	manifest	themselves	in	the	visible	world	as	good	fortune	or	misfortune.	So
also	the	changes	pertaining	to	the	work	and	the	field	of	action	are	invisible,	but	are	revealed	by	the	words
of	the	judgments.

9.	It	is	the	great	virtue	of	heaven	and	earth	to	bestow	life.	It	is	the	great	treasure	of	the	holy	sage
to	stand	in	the	right	place.

How	does	one	safeguard	this	place?	Through	men.1	By	what	are	men	gathered	together?	Through
goods.	Justice	means	restraining	men	from	wrongdoing	by	regulation	of	goods	and	by	rectification	of
judgments.
Here	the	connection	between	the	three	powers	is	shown.	Heaven	and	earth	bestow	life.	The	holy	sage

is	guided	by	the	same	principle;	but	to	carry	it	out	he	must	have	the	position	of	a	ruler.	This	position	is
safeguarded	by	the	men	whom	he	gathers	under	him.	Men	are	gathered	together	by	means	of	goods.	The
means	by	which	goods	are	administered,	and	defended	against	wrong,	is	justice.

This	presents	a	theory	of	society,	based	on	cosmic	principles,	 that	corresponds	with	the	views	of	 the
Confucian	school.

Some	commentators	wish	to	take	this	section	as	an	introduction	to	the	next	chapter.	This	has	a	certain
justification,	inasmuch	as	the	next	chapter	gives	a	survey	of	the	development	of	civilization,	with	the	Book
of	Changes	as	a	basis.

CHAPTER	II.	History	of	Civilization1
1.	When	 in	 early	 antiquity	 Pao	 Hsi2	 ruled	 the	 world,	 he	 looked	 upward	 and	 contemplated	 the

images	 in	 the	 heavens;	 he	 looked	 downward	 and	 contemplated	 the	 patterns	 on	 earth.	 He
contemplated	 the	markings	 of	 birds	 and	 beasts	 and	 the	 adaptations	 to	 the	 regions.	 He	 proceeded
directly	from	himself	and	indirectly	from	objects.	Thus	he	invented	the	eight	trigrams	in	order	to	enter
into	connection	with	the	virtues	of	the	light	of	the	gods	and	to	regulate	the	conditions	of	all	beings.



The	Pai	Hu	T’ung3	describes	the	primitive	condition	of	human	society	as	follows:
In	the	beginning	there	was	as	yet	no	moral	nor	social	order.	Men	knew	their	mothers	only,	not	 their

fathers.	 When	 hungry,	 they	 searched	 for	 food;	 when	 satisfied,	 they	 threw	 away	 the	 remnants.	 They
devoured	their	food	hide	and	hair,	drank	the	blood,	and	clad	themselves	in	skins	and	rushes.	Then	came
Fu	 Hsi	 and	 looked	 upward	 and	 contemplated	 the	 images	 in	 the	 heavens,	 and	 looked	 downward	 and
contemplated	the	occurrences	on	earth.	He	united	man	and	wife;	regulated	the	five	stages	of	change,	and
laid	down	the	laws	of	humanity.	He	devised	the	eight	trigrams,	in	order	to	gain	mastery	over	the	world.

The	name	of	the	mythical	founder	of	civilization	is	written	in	various	ways;	its	meaning	seems	to	point
to	 a	 hunter	 or	 an	 inventor	 of	 cooking.	 There	 is	 a	 difference	 of	 opinion	 as	 to	 whether	 the	 sixty-four
hexagrams	or	only	the	eight	trigrams	are	to	be	ascribed	to	him.	As	he	himself	 is	a	mythical	personality,
the	 dispute	may	 rest	where	 it	 stands.	 It	would	 seem	 to	 be	 certain	 that	 the	 sixty-four	 hexagrams	were
already	in	use	in	the	time	of	King	Wên.

2.	He	made	knotted	cords	and	used	them	for	nets	and	baskets	in	hunting	and	fishing.	He	probably
took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	THE	CLINGING.
This	chapter	tells	us	how	all	the	appurtenances	of	civilization	came	into	existence	as	reproductions	of

ideal,	archetypal	images.	In	a	certain	sense	this	idea	contains	a	truth.	Every	invention	comes	into	being	as
an	image	in	the	mind	of	the	inventor	before	it	makes	its	appearance	in	the	phenomenal	World	as	a	tool,	a
finished	 thing.	 Since,	 according	 to	 the	 school	 represented	 by	 the	Hsi	 Tz’u,	 the	 sixty-four	 hexagrams
present,	in	a	mysterious	way,	images	paralleling	nature,	an	attempt	can	be	made	here	to	derive	from	them
the	inventions	of	man	that	have	led	to	the	development	of	civilization.	However,	this	must	be	understood
not	in	the	sense	that	the	inventors	simply	took	the	hexagrams	of	the	book	and	made	their	 inventions	in
accordance	with	them,	but	rather	in	the	sense	that	out	of	the	relationships	represented	by	the	hexagrams
the	inventions	took	shape	in	the	minds	of	their	originators.

A	 net	 consists	 of	meshes,	 empty	within	 and	 surrounded	 by	 threads	without.	 The	 hexagram	Li,	 THE
CLINGING	 (30),	 represents	 a	 combination	 of	 meshes	 of	 this	 sort.	 Furthermore,	 the	 written	 character
means	“to	cling	to”	or	“to	be	caught	on	something.	“	For	example,	in	the	Book	of	Songs4	it	is	frequently
said	that	the	wild	goose	or	the	pheasant	was	caught	in	the	net	(li).

3.	When	Pao	Hsi’s	clan	was	gone,	there	sprang	up	the	clan	of	the	Divine	Husbandman.5	He	split	a
piece	of	wood	for	a	plowshare	and	bent	a	piece	of	wood	for	 the	plow	handle,	and	taught	 the	whole
world	the	advantage	of	laying	open	the	earth	with	a	plow.	He	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of
INCREASE.
The	primitive	plow	consisted	of	a	bent	pole	with	a	pointed	stick	fastened	on	in	front	for	scratching	the

earth.	The	advantage	of	 this	method	over	hoeing	was	 that	draft	 animals	 could	be	used	and	part	of	 the
work	shifted	to	oxen.

The	 hexagram	 I,	 INCREASE	 (42),	 consists	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams	 Sun	 and	 Chên,	 both	 associated	with
wood.	Sun	means	penetration,	Chên	movement.	The	nuclear	trigrams6	are	Kên	and	K’un,	both	associated
with	the	earth.	This	led	to	the	idea	of	constructing	a	wooden	instrument	that	would	penetrate	the	earth
and	when	moved	forward	would	turn	up	the	soil.

4.	When	the	sun	stood	at	midday,	he	held	a	market.	He	caused	the	people	of	 the	earth	to	come
together	and	collected	the	wares	of	the	earth.	They	exchanged	these	with	one	another,	then	returned
home,	and	each	thing	found	its	place.	Probably	he	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	BITING	THROUGH.

The	hexagram	Shih	Ho,	BITING	THROUGH	(21),	consists	of	Li,	the	sun,	above	and	Chên,	movement,
below.	Chên	also	means	a	great	road,	while	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	K’an	means	flowing	water,	and	the
lower,	Kên,	small	paths.	Thus	the	connotation	is	of	movement	under	the	sun,	a	streaming	together.	This	is
hardly	enough	 to	convey	 the	 idea	of	a	market,	but	 the	words	shih	ho	when	written	differently	can	also
mean	 food	 and	merchandise,	 and	 the	market	might	 be	 suggested	 in	 this	way.	 Evidently	 the	 hexagram
formerly	had	the	secondary	meaning	of	market	(cf.	the	explanation	of	this	hexagram	in	bk.	I).

5.	When	 the	clan	of	 the	Divine	Husbandman	was	gone,	 there	sprang	up	 the	clans	of	 the	Yellow
Emperor,	of	Yao,	and	of	Shun.7	They	brought	continuity	into	their	alterations,	so	that	the	people	did
not	 grow	 weary.	 They	 were	 divine	 in	 the	 transformations	 they	 wrought,	 so	 that	 the	 people	 were
content.	 When	 one	 change	 had	 run	 its	 course,	 they	 altered.	 (Through	 alteration	 they	 achieved
continuity.)	 Through	 continuity	 they	 achieved	 duration.	 Therefore:	 “They	 were	 blessed	 by	 heaven.
Good	fortune.	Nothing	that	does	not	further.”

The	Yellow	Emperor,	Yao,	and	Shun	allowed	the	upper	and	lower	garments	to	hang	down,	and	the
world	 was	 in	 order.	 They	 probably	 took	 this	 from	 the	 hexagrams	 of	 THE	 CREATIVE	 and	 THE
RECEPTIVE.
In	this	section	two	different	strata	are	to	be	distinguished.	The	closing	paragraph	seems	to	be	the	older

stratum.	The	introduction	of	clothes	is	depicted.	Accordingly,	Chêng	K’ang	Ch’êng8	says:	“Heaven	is	blue-



black,	 the	 earth	 is	 yellow;	 therefore	 they	made	 the	upper	garments	 dark	blue	 and	 the	 lower	garments
yellow.”

Allowing	the	garments	to	hang	down	was	later	taken	to	mean	that	the	Yellow	Emperor,	Yao,	and	Shun
sat	 quietly	 without	 stirring,	 and	 as	 a	 result	 of	 their	 inaction	 things	 automatically	 righted	 themselves.
Then,	from	previously	known	material,	there	was	appended	a	description	of	their	cultural	activity	and	the
blessing	 that	 grew	 out	 of	 it.	 The	 parenthetic	 sentence	 seems	 in	 turn	 to	 be	 a	 later	 addition	 to	 this
description.	 The	 meaning	 of	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 three	 rulers	 is	 that	 they	 constantly	 carried	 out	 timely
reforms.

6.	They	scooped	out	tree	trunks	for	boats	and	they	hardened	wood	in	the	fire	to	make	oars.	The
advantage	of	boats	and	oars	lay	in	providing	means	of	communication.	(They	reached	distant	parts,	in
order	to	benefit	the	whole	world.)	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	DISPERSION.

The	sentence	in	parentheses	has	been	questioned	by	Chu	Hsi.	The	hexagram	Huan,	DISPERSION	(59),
consists	of	the	trigram	Sun,	wood,	over	K’an,	water.	That	is	why	it	is	said	in	the	Judgment,	“It	furthers	one
to	 cross	 the	 great	 water,”	 and	 in	 the	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision,	 “To	 rely	 on	 wood	 is	 productive	 of
merit.”	A	boat	as	a	means	of	communication	across	rivers	and	for	travel	to	distant	places	is	represented
here.	Wood	over	water—this	is	the	meaning	of	the	primary	trigrams.	The	nuclear	trigrams	Kên	and	Chên
mean	large	and	small	roads.

7.	 They	 tamed	 the	 ox	 and	 yoked	 the	 horse.	 Thus	 heavy	 loads	 could	 be	 transported	 and	 distant
regions	 reached,	 for	 the	 benefit	 of	 the	 world.	 They	 probably	 took	 this	 from	 the	 hexagram	 of
FOLLOWING.

The	hexagram	Sui,	FOLLOWING	(17),	consists	of	Tui,	liveliness,	in	front	and	Chên,	movement,	behind
—an	image	of	the	way	in	which	the	ox	and	horse	go	ahead	and	the	wagon	moves	along	behind.	Oxen	were
for	heavy	carts,	horses	for	fast	carriages	and	war	chariots.	The	use	of	horses	for	riding	was	unknown	to
China	in	the	earliest	period.

8.	They	introduced	double	gates	and	night	watchmen	with	clappers,	in	order	to	deal	with	robbers.
They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	ENTHUSIASM.

The	hexagram	Yu,	ENTHUSIASM	(16),	consists	of	 the	trigram	Chên,	movement,	above	and	K’un,	 the
earth,	below.	The	nuclear	trigrams	are	K’an,	danger,	and	Kên,	mountain.	K’un	symbolizes	a	closed	door,
while	Kên	likewise	means	a	door;	hence	the	double	gates.	K’an	means	thief.	Beyond	the	gates,	movement,
with	wood	(Chên)	in	the	hand	(Kên),	serves	as	a	preparation	(yü	also	means	preparation)	against	the	thief.

9.	They	split	wood	and	made	a	pestle	of	it.	They	made	a	hollow	in	the	ground	for	a	mortar.	The	use
of	the	mortar	and	pestle	was	of	benefit	to	all	mankind.	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.

The	hexagram	Hsiao	Kuo,	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL	(62),	 is	composed	of	Chên,	movement,
wood,	above	and	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	stone,	below.	Kuo	also	means	transition.	The	mortar	was	the	primitive
form	of	the	mill,	and	signifies	the	transition	from	eating	whole	grain	to	baking.

10.	They	strung	a	piece	of	wood	for	a	bow	and	hardened	pieces	of	wood	in	the	fire	for	arrows.	The
use	 of	 bow	 and	 arrow	 is	 to	 keep	 the	world	 in	 fear.	 They	 probably	 took	 this	 from	 the	 hexagram	 of
OPPOSITION.

The	hexagram	K’uei,	OPPOSITION	(38),	consists	of	Li,	the	Clinging,	above	and	Tui,	the	Joyous,	below.
The	nuclear	trigrams	are	K’an,	danger,	and,	again,	Li.	The	whole	hexagram	indicates	strife.	Li	is	the	sun,
which	sends	arrows	from	afar.	Li	means	weapons,	K’an	danger.	The	danger	is	hedged	around	by	weapons,
therefore	one	is	not	afraid.

11.	In	primitive	times	people	dwelt	in	caves	and	lived	in	forests.	The	holy	men	of	a	later	time	made
the	change	to	buildings.	At	the	top	was	a	ridgepole,	and	sloping	down	from	it	there	was	a	roof,	to	keep
off	wind	and	rain.	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.

The	 hexagram	Ta	Chuang,	 THE	POWER	OF	 THE	GREAT	 (34),	 has	 Chên,	 thunder,	 above;	 the	 upper
nuclear	trigram	Tui,	lake,	is	at	the	top	of	Ch’ien,	heaven,	which	is	the	lower	nuclear	trigram.	The	lower



primary	trigram	is	also	Ch’ien,	heaven,	the	atmosphere.	Thus	the	hexagram	as	a	whole	means	a	heaven,	a
strong,	protected	space	with	thunder	and	rain	above	it.	The	trigram	Chên	also	means	wood,	and	as	the
eldest	son	it	means	the	ridgepole	at	the	top.	The	two	yielding	lines	at	the	top	are	then	thought	of	as	the
sloping	roof.

12.	In	primitive	times	the	dead	were	buried	by	covering	them	thickly	with	brushwood	and	placing
them	 in	 the	 open	 country,	without	 burial	mound	 or	 grove	 of	 trees.	 The	 period	 of	mourning	 had	no
definite	 duration.	 The	 holy	 men	 of	 a	 later	 time	 introduced	 inner	 and	 outer	 coffins	 instead.	 They
probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.

The	hexagram	Ta	Kuo,	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	(28),	consists	of	the	trigram	Tui,	the	lake,
above	and	Sun,	wood,	penetration,	below.	Forming	the	nuclear	trigrams	in	the	middle	is	Ch’ien,	heaven,
doubled.	 The	hexagram	must	 be	 taken	 as	 a	whole;	 the	 two	 yin	 lines	 above	 and	below	mean	 the	 earth,
within	which	the	double	coffin,	represented	by	the	double	heaven,	 is	 inclosed.	Entering	(Sun)	 their	 last
resting	place	in	this	way,	the	dead	are	made	glad	(Tui).	Here	we	have	a	link	with	ancestor	worship.

13.	 In	 primitive	 times	 people	 knotted	 cords	 in	 order	 to	 govern.	 The	 holy	 men	 of	 a	 later	 age
introduced	written	documents	instead,	as	a	means	of	governing	the	various	officials	and	supervising
the	people.	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	BREAK-THROUGH.

The	 hexagram	 Kuai,	 BREAK-THROUGH	 (43),	 has	 Tui,	 words,	 above	 and	 Ch’ien,	 strength,	 below.	 It
means	giving	permanence	to	words.	The	notch	at	the	top	also	indicates	the	form	of	the	oldest	documents:
cut	 in	wood,	 they	consisted	of	 two	halves	 that	 fitted	 into	each	other	when	held	 together.	As	a	 rule	 the
ancient	writings	were	scratched	on	tablets	of	smoothed	bamboo.	Here	the	significance	of	writing	in	the
organization	of	a	large	community	is	emphasized.

NOTE.	 In	 its	 main	 features	 the	 sketch	 of	 the	 development	 of	 civilization	 given	 in	 this	 chapter
corresponds	to	an	extraordinary	degree	with	our	own	ideas.	The	fundamental	thought,	that	all	institutions
are	based	on	the	development	of	definite	ideas,	is	likewise	undoubtedly	correct.	It	 is	not	always	easy	to
recognize	 such	 ideas	 in	 the	 complexes	 of	 ideas	 presented	 by	 the	 hexagrams,	 nor	 is	 it	 improbable	 that
there	were	 once	 certain	 connections	 that	 are	 now	obliterated.	 There	 are	 indications	 that	 in	 the	 period
preceding	 that	 of	 the	 Chou	 dynasty	 the	 hexagrams	 had	 meanings	 different	 from	 those	 which	 are
traditional	 today.	 Possibly	 this	 chapter	 affords	 insight	 into	 these	 earliest	 meanings.	 That	 still	 another
change	in	meaning	took	place	later	becomes	evident	when	we	compare	the	Judgments	with	the	Images.

CHAPTER	III.	On	the	Structure	of	the	Hexagrams
1.	Thus	the	Book	of	Changes	consists	of	images.	The	images	are	reproductions.

The	hexagrams	are	reproductions	of	conditions	in	the	heavens	and	on	earth.	Therefore	they	are	to	be
applied	productively;	they	have	creative	power,	so	to	speak,	in	the	realm	of	ideas,	as	explained	above.

2.	The	decisions	provide	the	material.
The	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision	 [i.e.,	 on	 the	 Judgment],1	 which	 is	 probably	 what	 is	 meant	 here,

presents	the	material	out	of	which	each	hexagram,	taken	as	a	whole,	is	constructed.	Thus	it	describes	the
situation	as	such	before	it	undergoes	change.	Naturally	this	also	applies	to	the	Judgment	itself.

3.	The	lines	are	imitations	of	movements	on	earth.
Here	the	lines	are	equivalent	to	the	judgments	appended	to	them;	the	judgments	apply	in	the	case	of

lines	 that	 move,	 that	 is,	 when	 they	 are	 nines	 or	 sixes.	 They	 reflect	 the	 changes	 within	 the	 individual
situations.

4.	Thus	do	good	fortune	and	misfortune	arise,	and	remorse	and	humiliation	appear.
This	movement	reveals	the	direction	that	events	are	taking,	and	warnings	or	confirmations	are	added.

CHAPTER	IV.	On	the	Nature	of	the	Trigrams
1.	The	light	trigrams	have	more	dark	lines,	the	dark	trigrams	have	more	light	lines.

The	“light”	trigrams	are	the	three	sons,	Chên,	 ,	K’an,	 ,	and	Kên,	 ,	each	of	which

consists	of	two	dark	lines	and	one	light	line.	The	“dark”	trigrams	are	the	three	daughters,	Sun,	 ,	Li,	

,	and	Tui,	 ,	each	of	which	consists	of	two	light	lines	and	one	dark	line.
2.	What	is	the	reason	for	this?	The	light	trigrams	are	uneven,	the	dark	trigrams	are	even.

The	light	trigrams	are	made	up	of	the	lines	7	+	8	+	8,	or	7	+	6	+	8,	or	7	+	6	+	6,	or	9	+	8	+	8,	or	9	+	6
+	6,	or	9	+	6	+	8.1	Using	the	relevant	numbers,	the	numerical	values	of	the	lines	in	the	dark	trigrams	can
be	found	in	the	same	way.	Hence	the	sum	of	the	values	of	the	lines	in	light	trigrams	is	always	an	uneven
number,	and	the	line	representing	the	uneven	number	[an	undivided	line]	is	therefore	the	determinant	of
the	light	trigram.	In	the	case	of	dark	trigrams,	the	reverse	is	true.

3.	What	is	their	nature	and	how	do	they	act?	The	light	trigrams	have	one	ruler	and	two	subjects.
They	show	the	way	of	the	superior	man.	The	dark	trigrams	have	two	rulers	and	one	subject.	This	is
the	way	of	the	inferior	man.
Where	one	alone	rules,	unity	 is	present,	whereas	when	one	person	must	serve	 two	masters,	nothing

good	can	come	of	it.	This	truth	is	here	more	or	less	accidentally	linked	with	the	structure	of	the	trigrams.



CHAPTER	V.	Explanation	of	Certain	Lines
1.	In	the	Changes	it	is	said:	“If	a	man	is	agitated	in	mind,	and	his	thoughts	go	hither	and	thither,

only	those	friends	on	whom	he	fixes	his	conscious	thoughts	will	follow.”
The	Master	said:	What	need	has	nature	of	thought	and	care?	In	nature	all	things	return	to	their

common	source	and	are	distributed	along	different	paths;	through	one	action,	the	fruits	of	a	hundred
thoughts	are	realized.	What	need	has	nature	of	thought,	of	care?

2.	When	 the	 sun	 goes,	 the	moon	 comes;	 when	 the	moon	 goes,	 the	 sun	 comes.	 Sun	 and	moon
alternate;	thus	light	comes	into	existence.	When	cold	goes,	heat	comes;	when	heat	goes,	cold	comes.
Cold	and	heat	alternate,	and	thus	the	year	completes	itself.	The	past	contracts.	The	future	expands.
Contraction	and	expansion	act	upon	each	other;	hereby	arises	that	which	furthers.

3.	The	measuring	worm	draws	 itself	 together	when	 it	wants	to	stretch	out.	Dragons	and	snakes
hibernate	in	order	to	preserve	life.	Thus	the	penetration	of	a	germinal	thought	into	the	mind	promotes
the	working	 of	 the	mind.	When	 this	working	 furthers	 and	 brings	 peace	 to	 life,	 it	 elevates	 a	man’s
nature.

4.	Whatever	 goes	 beyond	 this	 indeed	 transcends	 all	 knowledge.	When	 a	man	 comprehends	 the
divine	and	understands	the	transformations,	he	lifts	his	nature	to	the	level	of	the	miraculous.
In	 this	 explanation	 of	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fourth	 place	 in	 hexagram	 31,	 Hsien,	 INFLUENCE	 (bk.	 III),	 a

theory	 of	 the	 power	 of	 the	 unconscious	 is	 given.	Conscious	 influences	 are	 always	merely	 limited	 ones,
because	they	are	brought	about	by	intention.	Nature	knows	no	intentions;	this	is	why	everything	in	nature
is	so	great.	It	is	owing	to	the	underlying	unity	of	nature	that	all	its	thousand	ways	lead	to	a	goal	so	perfect
that	it	seems	to	have	been	planned	beforehand	down	to	the	last	detail.

Then,	in	connection	with	the	course	of	the	day	and	the	year,	we	are	shown	how	past	and	future	flow
into	each	other,	how	contraction	and	expansion	are	the	two	movements	through	which	the	past	prepares
the	future	and	the	future	unfolds	the	past.

In	 the	 two	 succeeding	 sections	 the	 same	 thought	 is	 applied	 to	 the	 man	 who,	 through	 supreme
concentration,	 so	 intensifies	 and	 strengthens	 his	 inner	 being	 that	 mysterious	 autonomous	 currents	 of
power	 emanate	 from	 him:	 thus	 the	 effects	 he	 creates	 proceed	 from	 his	 unconscious	 and	mysteriously
affect	 the	unconscious	 in	others,	attaining	such	breadth	and	depth	of	 influence	 that	 they	 transcend	the
individual	sphere	and	enter	the	realm	of	cosmic	phenomena.

5.	In	the	Changes	it	is	said:	“A	man	permits	himself	to	be	oppressed	by	stone,	and	leans	on	thorns
and	thistles.	He	enters	his	house	and	does	not	see	his	wife.	Misfortune.	“

The	Master	said:	If	a	man	permits	himself	to	be	oppressed	by	something	that	ought	not	to	oppress
him,	his	name	will	certainly	be	disgraced.	If	he	leans	on	things	upon	which	one	cannot	lean,	his	life
will	certainly	be	endangered.	For	him	who	is	 in	disgrace	and	danger,	the	hour	of	death	draws	near;
how	can	he	then	still	see	his	wife?
This	is	an	example	of	an	unfavorable	pronouncement.	Compare	the	explanation	of	the	six	in	the	third

place	in	hexagram	47,	K’un,	OPPRESSION	(bk.	I).
6.	In	the	Changes	it	 is	said:	“The	prince	shoots	at	a	hawk	on	a	high	wall.	He	kills	 it.	Everything

serves	to	further.”
The	Master	said:	The	hawk	is	the	object	of	the	hunt;	bow	and	arrow	are	the	tools	and	means.	The

marksman	is	man	(who	must	make	proper	use	of	the	means	to	his	end).	The	superior	man	contains	the
means	in	his	own	person.	He	bides	his	time	and	then	acts.	Why	then	should	not	everything	go	well?
He	acts	and	is	free.	Therefore	all	he	has	to	do	is	to	go	forth,	and	he	takes	his	quarry.	This	 is	how	a
man	fares	who	acts	after	he	has	made	ready	the	means.
This	is	an	example	of	a	favorable	line.	Compare	the	explanation	of	the	six	at	the	top	in	hexagram	40,

Hsieh,	DELIVERANCE	(bk.	I).
7.	 The	Master	 said:	 The	 inferior	 man	 is	 not	 ashamed	 of	 unkindness	 and	 does	 not	 shrink	 from

injustice.	 If	no	advantage	beckons	he	makes	no	effort.	 If	he	 is	not	 intimidated	he	does	not	 improve
himself,	 but	 if	 he	 is	made	 to	 behave	 correctly	 in	 small	matters	 he	 is	 careful	 in	 large	 ones.	 This	 is
fortunate	for	the	inferior	man.	This	is	what	is	meant	when	it	is	said	in	the	Book	of	Changes:	“His	feet
are	fastened	in	the	stocks,	so	that	his	toes	disappear.	No	blame.”
Here	we	have	an	example	of	a	line	that	leads	to	the	good	through	remorse.	Compare	the	explanation	of

the	nine	at	the	beginning	in	hexagram	21,	Shih	Ho,	BITING	THROUGH	(bk.	I).
8.	 If	 good	 does	 not	 accumulate,	 it	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 make	 a	 name	 for	 a	 man.	 If	 evil	 does	 not

accumulate,	 it	 is	not	strong	enough	 to	destroy	a	man.	Therefore	 the	 inferior	man	 thinks	 to	himself,
“Goodness	in	small	things	has	no	value,”	and	so	neglects	it.	He	thinks,	“Small	sins	do	no	harm,”	and
so	does	not	give	them	up.	Thus	his	sins	accumulate	until	they	can	no	longer	be	covered	up,	and	his
guilt	becomes	so	great	that	it	can	no	longer	be	wiped	out.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“His	neck
is	fastened	in	the	wooden	cangue,	so	that	his	ears	disappear.	Misfortune.”
This	 is	 an	 example	 of	 a	 line	 showing	 that	 misfortune	 follows	 hard	 upon	 humiliation.	 Compare	 the

explanation	of	the	nine	at	the	top	in	hexagram	21,	Shih	Ho,	BITING	THROUGH	(bk.	I).
9.	The	Master	said:	Danger	arises	when	a	man	feels	secure	in	his	position.	Destruction	threatens

when	a	man	seeks	to	preserve	his	worldly	estate.	Confusion	develops	when	a	man	has	put	everything
in	order.	Therefore	the	superior	man	does	not	forget	danger	in	his	security,	nor	ruin	when	he	is	well
established,	nor	confusion	when	his	affairs	are	 in	order.	 In	 this	way	he	gains	personal	safety	and	 is
able	to	protect	the	empire.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“	‘What	if	it	should	fail,	what	if	it	should
fail?’	In	this	way	he	ties	it	to	a	cluster	of	mulberry	shoots.”
This	is	an	example	of	a	line	showing	how	one	remains	free	of	blame	and	thus	attains	success.	See	the



explanation	of	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	in	hexagram	12,	P’i,	STANDSTILL	(bk.	I).
10.	The	Master	said:	Weak	character	coupled	with	honored	place,	meager	knowledge	with	large

plans,	limited	powers	with	heavy	responsibility,	will	seldom	escape	disaster.	In	the	Changes	it	is	said:
“The	legs	of	the	ting	are	broken.	The	prince’s	meal	 is	spilled,	and	his	person	 is	soiled.	Misfortune.”
This	is	said	of	someone	not	equal	to	his	task.
This	is	an	example	of	a	line	showing	that	one	meets	with	misfortune	through	being	inadequate	to	the

situation.	Compare	the	explanation	of	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	in	hexagram	50,	Ting,	THE	CALDRON
(bk.	I).

11.	The	Master	said:	To	know	the	seeds,	that	is	divine	indeed.	In	his	association	with	those	above
him,	the	superior	man	does	not	flatter.	In	his	association	with	those	beneath	him,	he	is	not	arrogant.
For	he	knows	the	seeds.	The	seeds	are	the	first	imperceptible	beginning	of	movement,	the	first	trace
of	 good	 fortune	 (or	 misfortune)	 that	 shows	 itself.	 The	 superior	 man	 perceives	 the	 seeds	 and
immediately	 takes	action.	He	does	not	wait	even	a	whole	day.	 In	 the	Changes	 it	 is	 said:	 “Firm	as	a
rock.	Not	a	whole	day.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.”

Firm	as	a	rock,	what	need	of	a	whole	day?
The	judgment	can	be	known.
The	superior	man	knows	what	is	hidden	and	what	is	evident.
He	knows	weakness,	he	knows	strength	as	well.
Hence	the	myriads	look	up	to	him.

This	 is	 an	 example	 of	 a	 line	 showing	 that	 foreknowledge	 enables	 one	 to	 escape	misfortune	 in	 good
time.	Compare	the	explanation	of	the	six	in	the	second	place	in	hexagram	16,	Yü,	ENTHUSIASM	(bk.	I).

12.	The	Master	said:	Yen	Hui	 is	one	who	will	surely	attain	 it.	 If	he	has	a	 fault,	he	never	 fails	 to
recognize	it;	having	recognized	it,	he	never	commits	the	error	a	second	time.	In	the	Changes	it	is	said:
“Return	from	a	short	distance.	No	need	for	remorse.	Great	good	fortune.”
This	 is	 an	 example	 of	 a	 line	 showing	 that	 one	 can	 learn	 from	 experience.	 Yen	Hui	was	 the	 favorite

disciple	of	Confucius.	It	is	said	in	the	Analects	too	that	he	never	committed	the	same	error	twice.	See	the
explanation	of	the	nine	at	the	beginning	in	hexagram	24,	Fu,	RETURN	(bk.	III).

13.	The	Master	said:	Heaven	and	earth	come	together,	and	all	 things	take	shape	and	find	 form.
Male	and	female	mix	their	seed,	and	all	creatures	take	shape	and	are	born.	In	the	Changes	it	is	said:
“When	three	people	journey	together,	their	number	decreases	by	one.	When	one	man	journeys	alone,
he	finds	a	companion.”
This	is	an	example	of	a	line	that	is	favorable	by	reason	of	unity.	Compare	the	explanation	of	the	six	in

the	third	place	in	hexagram	41,	Sun,	DECREASE	(bk.	III).
14.	The	Master	said:	The	superior	man	sets	his	person	at	rest	before	he	moves;	he	composes	his

mind	 before	 he	 speaks;	 he	makes	 his	 relations	 firm	 before	 he	 asks	 for	 something.	 By	 attending	 to
these	 three	 matters,	 the	 superior	 man	 gains	 complete	 security.	 But	 if	 a	 man	 is	 brusque	 in	 his
movements,	others	will	not	co-operate.	If	he	is	agitated	in	his	words,	they	awaken	no	echo	in	others.	If
he	asks	for	something	without	having	first	established	relations,	it	will	not	be	given	to	him.	If	no	one	is
with	him,	those	who	would	harm	him	draw	near.	In	the	Changes	it	is	said:	“He	brings	increase	to	no
one.	Indeed,	someone	even	strikes	him.	He	does	not	keep	his	heart	constantly	steady.	Misfortune.”
This	 is	 an	 example	 of	 a	 line	 showing	 that	 everything	 depends	 on	 proper	 preparation.	 Compare	 the

explanation	of	the	nine	at	the	top	in	hexagram	42,	I,	INCREASE	(bk.	I).
CHAPTER	VI.	On	the	Nature	of	the	Book	of	Changes	in	General
1.	The	Master	said:	The	Creative	and	the	Receptive	are	indeed	the	gateway	to	the	Changes.	The

Creative	is	the	representative	of	light	things	and	the	Receptive	of	dark	things.	In	that	the	natures	of
the	dark	and	the	light	are	joined,	the	firm	and	the	yielding	receive	form.	Thus	do	the	relationships	of
heaven	and	earth	take	shape,	and	we	enter	into	relation	with	the	nature	of	the	light	of	the	gods.
Following	out	what	has	been	said	in	part	I,	chapter	XII,	section	3,	the	method	of	the	Book	of	Changes	is

presented	here.	The	first	two	trigrams,	the	Creative	and	the	Receptive,	are	shown	as	representatives	of
the	two	polar	primal	forces.	The	aim	is	to	explain	that	matter	is	the	product	of	energy.	The	light	and	the
dark	are	energies.	The	interaction	of	these	forces	gives	rise	to	matter—that	is,	the	firm	and	the	yielding.
Matter	makes	up	 the	 form,	 the	body,	of	all	beings	 in	heaven	and	on	earth,	but	 it	 is	always	energy	 that
keeps	it	in	motion.	The	important	thing	is	to	maintain	connection	with	these	divine	forces	of	light.

2.	The	names	employed	are	manifold	but	not	superfluous.	When	we	examine	their	kinds,	thoughts
about	the	decline	of	an	era	come	to	mind.
The	 names	 of	 the	 sixty-four	 hexagrams	 are	 diverse,	 but	 they	 all	 keep	 within	 the	 sphere	 of	 the

necessary.	Actual	situations,	just	as	life	brings	them,	are	described.	The	situations	throughout	are	of	such
a	nature	as	to	make	it	plain	that	the	reference	is	to	an	era	of	decline,	the	aim	being	to	provide	the	means
of	 reconstruction.	 It	 is	 pointed	out	 that	 the	body	of	 ideas	 in	 the	hexagrams	 stems	 from	a	 time	already
confronted	with	phenomena	of	decline.

3.	The	Changes	illumine	the	past	and	interpret	the	future.	They	disclose	that	which	is	hidden	and
open	 that	which	 is	dark.	They	distinguish	 things	by	means	of	 suitable	names.	Then,	when	 the	right
words	and	decisive	judgments	are	added,	everything	is	complete.
The	wording	of	this	section,	and	indeed	of	the	whole	of	this	chapter,	seems	to	be	rather	uncertain,	but

the	general	meaning	is	easy	to	understand.	Here	again	the	various	connotations	of	the	Book	of	Changes
are	pointed	out:	hidden	things	are	revealed	in	time	and	space,	first	symbolically	by	means	of	names	and
relationships,	then	explicitly	by	means	of	the	judgments.

4.	 The	 names	 employed	 sound	 unimportant,	 but	 the	 possibilities	 of	 application	 are	 great.	 The



meanings	are	 far-reaching,	 the	 judgments	are	well	ordered.	The	words	are	roundabout	but	 they	hit
the	mark.	Things	are	openly	set	forth,	but	they	contain	also	a	deeper	secret.	This	is	why	in	doubtful
cases	they	may	serve	to	guide	the	conduct	of	men	and	thus	to	show	the	requital	for	reaching	or	for
missing	the	goal.
The	 abstract,	 allegorical	 content	 of	 the	 hexagrams	 is	 here	 pointed	 out.	 The	 hexagrams	 permit	 of	 a

general	 extension	 to	 all	 sorts	 of	 situations,	 because	 they	 present	 nothing	 but	 the	 laws	 that	 pertain	 to
various	complexes	of	conditions.

CHAPTER	VII.	The	Relation	of	Certain	Hexagrams	to	Character	Formation
1.	The	Changes	came	into	use	in	the	period	of	middle	antiquity.	Those	who	composed	the	Changes

had	great	care	and	sorrow.
This	passage	refers	to	King	Wên	and	his	son,	the	Duke	of	Chou,	who	both	lived	through	very	difficult

times.	The	writer	of	the	lines	quoted	above	feels	himself	in	sympathy	with	them	in	this	respect,	for	he	too
can	do	nothing	more	than	preserve	for	posterity	the	framework	of	a	perishing	civilization.

2.	Thus	the	hexagram	of	TREADING	shows	the	basis	of	character.	MODESTY	shows	the	handle	of
character;	 RETURN,	 the	 stem	 of	 character.	 DURATION	 brings	 about	 firmness	 of	 character;
DECREASE,	 cultivation	 of	 character;	 INCREASE,	 fullness	 of	 character;	 OPPRESSION,	 the	 test	 of
character;	THE	WELL,	the	field	of	character;	THE	GENTLE,	the	exercise	of	character.

3.	 The	 hexagram	 of	 TREADING	 is	 harmonious	 and	 attains	 its	 goal.	MODESTY	 gives	 honor	 and
shines	 forth.	 RETURN	 is	 small,	 yet	 different	 from	 external	 things.	 DURATION	 shows	 manifold
experiences	without	satiety.	DECREASE	shows	first	what	is	difficult	and	then	what	is	easy.	INCREASE
shows	 the	 growth	 of	 fullness	 without	 artifices.	 OPPRESSION	 leads	 to	 perplexity	 and	 thereby	 to
success.	THE	WELL	abides	in	its	place,	yet	has	influence	on	other	things.	Through	THE	GENTLE	one
is	able	to	weigh	things	and	remain	hidden.

4.	 TREADING	 brings	 about	 harmonious	 conduct.	 MODESTY	 serves	 to	 regulate	 the	 mores.
RETURN	leads	to	self-knowledge.	DURATION	brings	about	unity	of	character.	DECREASE	keeps	harm
away.	 INCREASE	 furthers	what	 is	 useful.	 Through	OPPRESSION	one	 learns	 to	 lessen	one’s	 rancor.
THE	WELL	brings	about	discrimination	as	to	what	is	right.	Through	THE	GENTLE	one	is	able	to	take
special	circumstances	into	account.1
Here	 nine	 hexagrams	 are	 used	 to	 show	 the	 development	 of	 character.	 First	 the	 relations	 of	 the

hexagrams	 to	 character	 are	 given,	 then	 the	 material	 of	 the	 hexagrams,	 and	 finally	 their	 effect.	 The
movement	is	from	within	outward.	What	is	wrought	in	the	depths	of	the	heart	becomes	outwardly	visible
in	its	effects.	The	nine	hexagrams	are	as	follows:

1.	Lü,	TREADING	(10).	This	hexagram	deals	with	the	rules	of	good	conduct,	compliance	with	which	is	a
prerequisite	of	character	formation.	This	good	conduct	is	harmonious—in	conformity	with	the	trigram	Tui,
the	Joyous,	which	is	inside—and	hence	attains	its	goal	even	under	difficult	circumstances	(“treading	upon
the	tail	of	the	tiger”).	Thus	it	brings	about	those	harmonious	forms	which	are	a	prerequisite	of	outward
behavior.

2.	 Ch’ien,	 MODESTY	 (15).	 This	 hexagram	 shows	 the	 attitude	 that	 is	 necessary	 before	 character
formation	 can	 be	 undertaken.	 Modesty	 (mountain	 under	 the	 earth)	 honors	 others	 and	 thereby	 attains
honor	for	itself;	it	regulates	human	intercourse	in	such	a	way	that	friendliness	evokes	friendliness.	To	the
outward	forms	it	adds	the	right	attitude	of	mind	as	content.

3.	Fu,	RETURN	(24).	This	hexagram	is	characterized	by	the	fact	that	a	 light	 line	returns	from	below
and	moves	upward.	It	means	the	root	and	stem	of	character.	The	good	that	shows	itself	below	is	at	first
quite	 insignificant,	 but	 it	 is	 strong	enough	 to	be	able	 constantly	 to	prevail	 in	 its	 own	unique	character
against	 any	 temptation	 of	 the	 surroundings.	 In	 the	 sense	 of	 return,	 it	 also	 suggests	 lasting	 reform
following	upon	errors	committed,	and	the	self-examination	and	self-knowledge	necessary	for	this.

4.	Hêng,	DURATION	(32).	This	hexagram	brings	about	 firmness	of	character	 in	 the	 frame	of	 time.	 It
shows	wind	and	thunder	constantly	together;	hence	there	are	manifold	movements	and	experiences,	from
which	fixed	rules	are	derived,	so	that	a	unified	character	results.

5.	 Sun,	 DECREASE	 (41).	 This	 hexagram	 shows	 a	 decrease	 in	 influence	 of	 the	 lower	 faculties,	 the
untamed	instincts,	in	favor	of	the	higher	life	of	the	mind.	Here	we	have	the	essence	of	character	training.
The	 hexagram	 shows	 first	 the	 difficult	 thing—the	 taming	 of	 the	 instincts—then	 the	 easy	 phase,	 when
character	is	under	control;	thus	harm	is	kept	away.

6.	I,	INCREASE	(42).	This	hexagram	gives	needed	fullness	to	character.	Mere	asceticism	is	not	enough
to	 make	 a	 good	 character:	 greatness	 is	 also	 needed.	 Thus	 INCREASE	 shows	 an	 organic	 growth	 of
personality	that	is	not	artificial	and	hence	furthers	what	is	useful.

7.	K’un,	OPPRESSION	(47).	This	hexagram	leads	the	individual	of	developed	character	finally	into	the
field	where	he	must	prove	himself.	Difficulties	and	obstacles	arise;	these	must	be	overcome,	yet	they	often
prove	 insuperable.	 He	 sees	 himself	 confronted	 by	 bounds	 that	 he	 cannot	 set	 aside	 and	 that	 can	 be
surmounted	only	by	recognizing	them	for	what	they	are.	In	thus	recognizing	as	fate	the	things	that	must
be	so	taken,	one	ceases	to	hate	adversity—of	what	use	would	it	be	to	storm	against	fate—and	through	this
lessening	of	resentment,	character	is	purified	and	advances	to	a	higher	level.

8.	Ching,	 THE	WELL	 (48).	 This	 hexagram	 represents	 a	wellspring,	which,	 though	 fixed	 in	 one	 spot,
dispenses	blessing	 far	 and	wide	and	 so	makes	 its	 influence	 far-reaching.	This	 shows	 the	 field	 in	which
character	 can	 take	 effect.	 We	 perceive	 the	 profound	 influence	 emanating	 from	 a	 richly	 endowed	 and
generous	 personality,	 an	 influence	 that	 is	 not	 any	 the	 less	 because	 the	 person	 exerting	 it	 keeps	 in	 the
background.	The	hexagram	shows	what	is	right,	and	thus	makes	it	possible	for	the	right	to	take	effect.

9.	 Sun,	 THE	 GENTLE,	 THE	 PENETRATING	 (57).	 This	 hexagram	 gives	 the	 proper	 flexibility	 of



character.	What	 is	needed	 is	not	 rigidity	 that	holds	 fast	 to	established	principles	and	 is	 in	 reality	mere
pedantry,	but	mobility:	thus	one	weighs	things	and	penetrates	to	the	needs	of	the	time	without	exposing
oneself	 to	 attack,	 so	 learning	 to	 take	 circumstances	 into	 account	 and	 to	 preserve	 a	 strong	 unity	 of
character	along	with	intelligent	versatility.

CHAPTER	VIII.	On	the	Use	of	the	Book	of	Changes:	The	Lines
1.	The	Changes	is	a	book
From	which	one	may	not	hold	aloof.
Its	tao	is	forever	changing—
Alteration,	movement	without	rest,
Flowing	through	the	six	empty	places;
Rising	and	sinking	without	fixed	law,
Firm	and	yielding	transform	each	other.
They	cannot	be	confined	within	a	rule;
It	is	only	change	that	is	at	work	here.
2.	They	move	inward	and	outward	according	to	fixed	rhythms.
Without	or	within,	they	teach	caution.
3.	They	also	show	care	and	sorrow	and	their	causes.
Though	you	have	no	teacher,
Approach	them	as	you	would	your	parents.
4.	First	take	up	the	words,
Ponder	their	meaning,
Then	the	fixed	rules	reveal	themselves.
But	if	you	are	not	the	right	man,
The	meaning	will	not	manifest	itself	to	you.

In	 half	 rhythmic	 and	 half	 rhymed	 prose,	 we	 are	 here	 admonished	 to	 study	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes
diligently.	 It	 is	 pointed	 out	 with	 praise	 that	 continuous	 change	 is	 the	 rule	 of	 the	 book.	 In	 conclusion,
attention	 is	 called	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 an	 innate	 capacity	 is	 essential	 to	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 book,
otherwise	it	will	remain	locked	as	if	with	seven	seals.	If	the	person	consulting	the	oracle	is	not	in	contact
with	tao,	he	does	not	receive	an	intelligible	answer,	since	it	would	be	of	no	avail.

CHAPTER	IX.	The	Lines	(continued)
1.	The	Changes	 is	a	book	whose	hexagrams	begin	with	 the	 first	 line	and	are	summed	up	 in	 the

last.	 The	 lines	 are	 the	 essential	material.	 The	 six	 lines	 are	 interspersed	 according	 to	 the	meaning
belonging	to	them	at	the	time.
This	section	discusses	the	relation	of	the	lines	to	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.	With	the	individual	lines	as

the	 material,	 the	 hexagram	 is	 built	 from	 the	 bottom	 upward.	 The	 individual	 lines	 have	 within	 this
sequence	the	meaning	imparted	to	them	by	force	of	the	particular	situation.

2.	The	beginning	line	is	difficult	to	understand.	The	top	line	is	easy	to	understand.	For	they	stand
in	the	relationship	of	cause	and	effect.	The	judgment	on	the	first	line	is	tentative,	but	at	the	last	line
everything	has	attained	completion.
Here	in	the	first	instance	the	reciprocal	relationship	between	the	first	and	the	top	line	is	stated.	Both

stand,	as	it	were,	outside	the	essential	hexagram	and	the	nuclear	trigrams.	At	the	first	line	the	action	is
only	just	beginning	to	develop,	and	at	the	last	it	is	concluded.

3.	But	if	one	wishes	to	explore	things	in	their	manifold	gradation,	and	their	qualities	as	well,	and
to	discriminate	between	right	and	wrong,	it	cannot	be	done	completely	without	the	middle	lines.
The	 “things	 in	 their	 manifold	 gradation”	 result	 from	 the	 manifold	 gradation	 of	 the	 places.	 Their

qualities	inhere	in	their	firm	or	their	yielding	character.	Right	and	wrong	are	distinguishable	according	to
whether	or	not	the	lines	occupy	the	places	appropriate	to	them	in	view	of	the	meaning	of	the	time.

4.	Yes,	even	that	which	 is	most	 important	 in	regard	to	surviving	or	perishing,	 in	regard	to	good
fortune	or	misfortune,	can	be	known	in	the	course	of	time.	The	man	of	knowledge	contemplates	the
judgment	on	the	decision,	and	thus	he	can	think	out	for	himself	the	greater	part.
In	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision	the	rulers	of	the	hexagrams	are	always	indicated.	By	pondering	the

relationships	 of	 the	other	 lines	 to	 these	 rulers,	 one	 can	gain	an	approximate	 idea	of	 their	position	and
meaning	in	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.

5.	 The	 second	 and	 the	 fourth	 place	 correspond	 in	 their	 work	 but	 are	 differentiated	 by	 their
positions.	They	do	not	correspond	as	regards	the	degree	to	which	they	are	good.	The	second	is	usually
praised,	the	fourth	is	usually	warned,	because	it	stands	near	the	ruler.	The	meaning	of	the	yielding	is
that	it	is	not	favorable	for	it	to	be	far	away.	The	important	thing,	however,	is	to	remain	without	blame;
its	expression	consists	in	being	yielding	and	central.
The	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	ruler.	The	second	and	the	fourth	place	are	those	of	officials.	The	second,

which	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	fifth	(each	being	centrally	placed,	the	former	in
the	inner,	the	latter	in	the	outer	trigram),	is	the	official	who,	far	from	the	court,	is	attending	to	his	work	in
the	 country.	 The	 fourth	 place	 is	 that	 of	 the	 minister.	 Therefore	 the	 two	 places,	 both	 dark—that	 is,
dependent—are	not	 equally	good,	despite	 their	 correspondence	with	 respect	 to	 their	work.	The	 second
usually	carries	a	 favorable	 judgment,	 the	 fourth	a	warning	one:	because	 it	 is	 too	close	 to	 the	prince,	 it
must	be	doubly	cautious.	Now	it	is	not	in	the	nature	of	the	yielding	to	prosper	when	it	is	far	from	the	firm,
hence	 one	would	 expect	 the	 second	 place	 to	 be	 less	 favorable	 than	 the	 fourth.	However,	 an	 important
factor	is	that	it	is	centrally	placed	and	so	remains	without	blame.

6.	The	third	and	the	fifth	place	correspond	in	their	work	but	are	differentiated	by	their	positions.



The	 third	usually	has	misfortune,	 the	 fifth	usually	has	merit,	because	 they	are	graded	according	 to
rank.	The	weaker	is	endangered,	the	stronger	has	victory.
The	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	ruler.	The	third,	as	the	top	place	of	the	inner	[lower]	trigram,	has	at	least	a

limited	power.	But	 it	 is	not	central;	 it	 is	 in	an	insecure	position	on	the	boundary	between	two	trigrams.
Therein,	as	well	as	in	its	lower	rank,	lie	elements	of	weakness	that	in	most	situations	show	the	place	to	be
endangered.	The	 fifth	place	 is	 central	 and	 strong,	 the	 ruler	of	 the	hexagram;	 these	are	all	 elements	of
strength,	promising	victory.

CHAPTER	X.	The	Lines	(continued)
1.	The	Changes	is	a	book	vast	and	great,	in	which	everything	is	completely	contained.	The	tao	of

heaven	is	in	it,	the	tao	of	the	earth	is	in	it,	and	the	tao	of	man	is	in	it.	It	combines	these	three	primal
powers	and	doubles	them;	that	is	why	there	are	six	lines.	The	six	lines	are	nothing	other	than	the	ways
(tao)	of	the	three	primal	powers.

2.	The	Way	has	changes	and	movements.	Therefore	the	lines	are	called	changing	lines.	The	lines
have	 gradations,	 therefore	 they	 represent	 things.	 Things	 are	 diverse;	 this	 gives	 rise	 to	 line
characteristics.	The	line	characteristics	do	not	always	correspond.	From	this	arise	good	fortune	and
misfortune.
Here	the	places	are	divided	according	to	the	three	primal	powers.	The	first	and	the	second	line	are	the

places	of	the	earth,	the	third	and	the	fourth	those	of	man,	and	the	fifth	and	the	top	line	those	of	heaven;
this	division	comes	into	consideration	with	the	very	first	hexagram,	THE	CREATIVE.	According	to	whether
the	lines	of	the	different	gradations	are	appropriate	to	the	places,	conclusions	are	drawn	as	to	whether
they	mean	good	fortune	or	misfortune.	The	Chinese	character	for	“line,”	hsiao,	when	written	differently
may	also	mean	“to	imitate.”	This	is	why	the	lines	are	here	called	“changing	lines”—that	is,	lines	oriented
to	the	pattern	of	tao.	The	written	character	for	hsiao	consists	of	two	sets	of	crossed	lines,	suggesting	the

crossing	of	yang	and	yin	( ).
CHAPTER	XI.	The	Value	of	Caution	as	a	Teaching	of	the	Book	of	Changes
The	time	at	which	the	Changes	came	to	the	fore	was	that	in	which	the	house	of	Yin	came	to	an	end

and	the	way	of	 the	house	of	Chou	was	rising,	 that	 is,	 the	time	when	King	Wên	and	the	tyrant	Chou
Hsin	were	pitted	against	each	other.1

This	is	why	the	judgments	of	the	book	so	frequently	warn	against	danger.	He	who	is	conscious	of
danger	creates	peace	for	himself;	he	who	takes	things	lightly	creates	his	own	downfall.	The	tao	of	this
book	is	great.	It	omits	none	of	the	hundred	things.	It	is	concerned	about	beginning	and	end,	and	it	is
encompassed	in	the	words	“without	blame.”	This	is	the	tao	of	the	Changes.
King	Wên,	the	founder	of	the	Chou	dynasty,	was	held	captive	by	the	last	ruler	of	the	Yin	dynasty,	the

tyrant	 Chou	 Hsin.	 He	 is	 said	 to	 have	 composed	 the	 judgments	 on	 the	 different	 hexagrams	 during	 his
captivity.	Because	of	the	danger	of	his	situation,	all	these	judgments	emanate	from	a	caution	that	is	intent
on	remaining	without	blame	and	thus	attains	success.

CHAPTER	XII.	Summary
1.	The	Creative	is	the	strongest	of	all	things	in	the	world.	The	expression	of	its	nature	is	invariably

the	easy,	in	order	thus	to	master	the	dangerous.	The	Receptive	is	the	most	devoted	of	all	things	in	the
world.	The	expression	of	its	nature	is	invariably	simple,	in	order	thus	to	master	the	obstructive.
The	 two	 cardinal	 principles	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes,	 the	Creative	 and	 the	Receptive,	 are	 here	 once

more	presented	in	their	essential	features.	The	Creative	is	represented	as	strength,	to	which	everything	is
easy,	 but	which	 remains	 conscious	 of	 the	 danger	 involved	 in	working	 from	 above	 downward,	 and	 thus
masters	the	danger.	The	Receptive	is	represented	as	devotion,	which	therefore	acts	simply,	but	which	is
conscious	 of	 the	 obstructions	 inherent	 in	 working	 from	 below	 upward,	 and	 hence	 masters	 these
obstructions.

2.	To	be	able	to	preserve	joyousness	of	heart	and	yet	to	be	concerned	in	thought:	in	this	way	we
can	determine	good	fortune	and	misfortune	on	earth,	and	bring	to	perfection	everything	on	earth.
In	the	text	there	appear	next	to	the	expression,	“to	be	concerned	in	thought,”	two	other	characters	that

Chu	Hsi	has	quite	correctly	eliminated	as	later	additions.	Joyousness	of	heart	is	the	way	of	the	Creative.
To	be	concerned	in	thought	is	the	way	of	the	Receptive.	Through	joyousness	one	gains	an	overall	view	of
good	fortune	and	misfortune,	through	concern	one	attains	the	possibility	of	perfection.

3.	 Therefore:	 The	 changes	 and	 transformations	 refer	 to	 action.	 Beneficent	 deeds	 have	 good
auguries.	Hence	the	images	help	us	to	know	the	things,	and	the	oracle	helps	us	to	know	the	future.
The	changes	refer	to	action.	Hence	the	images	of	the	Book	of	Changes	are	of	such	sort	that	one	can	act

in	accordance	with	the	changes	and	know	reality	(cf.	also	chapter	II	above,	where	inventions	are	traced	to
the	images).	Events	tend	toward	good	fortune	or	misfortune,	which	are	expressed	in	omens.	In	that	the
Book	of	Changes	interprets	these	omens,	the	future	becomes	clear.

4.	Heaven	 and	 earth	 determine	 the	places.	 The	holy	 sages	 fulfill	 the	 possibilities	 of	 the	 places.
Through	 the	 thoughts	 of	men	 and	 the	 thoughts	 of	 spirits,	 the	 people	 are	 enabled	 to	 participate	 in
these	possibilities.
Heaven	 and	 earth	 determine	 the	 places	 and	 thereby	 the	 possibilities.	 The	 sages	 make	 these

possibilities	into	reality,	and	through	the	collaboration	of	the	thoughts	of	spirits	and	of	men	in	the	Book	of
Changes,	it	becomes	possible	to	extend	the	blessings	of	culture	to	the	people	as	well.

5.	The	eight	trigrams	point	the	way	by	means	of	their	images;	the	words	accompanying	the	lines,
and	 the	 decisions,	 speak	 according	 to	 the	 circumstances.	 In	 that	 the	 firm	 and	 the	 yielding	 are
interspersed,	good	fortune	and	misfortune	can	be	discerned.

6.	 Changes	 and	 movements	 are	 judged	 according	 to	 the	 furtherance	 (that	 they	 bring).	 Good



fortune	and	misfortune	 change	 according	 to	 the	 conditions.	 Therefore:	 Love	 and	hate	 combat	 each
other,	and	good	fortune	and	misfortune	result	therefrom.	The	far	and	the	near	injure	each	other,	and
remorse	and	humiliation	result	therefrom.	The	true	and	the	false	influence	each	other,	and	advantage
and	 injury	 result	 therefrom.	 In	 all	 the	 situations	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 it	 is	 thus:	 When	 closely
related	 things	 do	 not	 harmonize,	 misfortune	 is	 the	 result:	 this	 gives	 rise	 to	 injury,	 remorse,	 and
humiliation.
The	 close	 relationships	 between	 the	 lines	 are	 those	 of	 correspondence	 and	 of	 holding	 together.1

According	to	whether	the	lines	attract	or	repel	one	another,	good	fortune	or	misfortune	ensues,	in	all	the
gradations	possible	in	each	case.

7.	The	words	of	a	man	who	plans	revolt	are	confused.	The	words	of	a	man	who	entertains	doubt	in
his	 inmost	 heart	 are	 ramified.	 The	 words	 of	 men	 of	 good	 fortune	 are	 few.	 Excited	 men	 use	 many
words.	Slanderers	of	good	men	are	roundabout	in	their	words.	The	words	of	a	man	who	has	lost	his
standpoint	are	twisted.
This	passage	summarizes	the	effects	of	states	of	mind	on	verbal	expression.	It	becomes	plain	therefrom

that	the	authors	of	the	Book	of	Changes,	who	are	so	sparing	of	words,	belong	in	the	category	of	men	of
good	fortune.



The	Structure	of	the	Hexagrams
1.	GENERAL	CONSIDERATIONS

The	 foregoing	 supplies	 most	 of	 what	 is	 necessary	 for	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 hexagrams.	 Here,
however,	there	follows	a	summary	regarding	their	structure.	This	will	enable	the	reader	to	perceive	why
the	hexagrams	have	precisely	the	meanings	given	them,	why	the	lines	have	the	often	seemingly	fantastic
text	that	is	appended	to	them—indicating,	by	means	of	allegory,	what	position	the	line	holds	in	the	total
situation	of	the	hexagram,	and	to	what	degree	it	therefore	signifies	good	fortune	or	misfortune.

This	substructure	of	explanation	has	been	carried	to	great	lengths	by	the	Chinese	commentators.	Since
the	Han	period1	 especially,	when	 the	magic	 of	 the	 “five	 stages	 of	 change”	 became	 associated	with	 the
Book	of	Changes,	more	and	more	mystery	and	finally	more	and	more	hocus-pocus	have	become	attached
to	 the	book.	This	 is	what	has	given	 the	book	 its	 reputation	 for	profundity	and	unintelligibility.	 I	believe
that	the	reader	may	be	spared	all	this	overgrowth,	and	have	presented	only	such	matter	from	the	text	and
the	oldest	commentaries	as	proves	itself	relevant.

Obviously	 in	 a	 work	 like	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 there	 is	 always	 a	 nonrational	 residuum.	 Why,	 in	 a
particular	 instance,	 one	 given	 aspect	 is	 stressed,	 rather	 than	 some	 other	 that	might	 just	 as	well	 have
been,	 can	 no	more	 be	 accounted	 for	 than	 the	 fact	 that	 oxen	 have	 horns	 and	 not	 upper	 front	 teeth	 as
horses	have.	It	is	possible	only	to	give	proof	of	the	interrelations	within	the	framework	of	what	is	posited;
to	 sustain	 the	 analogy,	 it	 is	 like	 explaining	 to	what	 extent	 there	 is	 an	 organic	 connection	 between	 the
development	of	horns	and	the	absence	of	upper	front	teeth.

2.	THE	EIGHT	TRIGRAMS	AND	THEIR	APPLICATION
As	has	previously	been	pointed	out,	the	hexagrams	should	be	thought	of	not	merely	as	made	up	of	six

individual	lines	but	always	as	composed	of	two	primary	trigrams.	In	the	interpretation	of	the	hexagrams,
these	primary	trigrams	play	a	part	according	to	the	various	aspects	of	their	character—first	according	to
their	attributes,	then	according	to	their	images,	and	finally	according	to	their	positions	within	the	family
sequence	(here	uniformly	only	the	Sequence	of	Later	Heaven2	is	taken	into	account):

These	 general	meanings,	 particularly	 when	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 interpretation	 of	 the	 individual	 lines,
must	be	supplemented	by	the	lists	of	symbols	and	attributes—at	first	glance	seemingly	superfluous—given
in	chapter	III	of	the	Shuo	Kua,	Discussion	of	the	Trigrams.

In	 addition,	 the	 positions	 of	 the	 trigrams	 in	 relation	 to	 each	 other	must	 be	 taken	 into	 account.	 The
lower	 trigram	 is	below,	within,	and	behind;	 the	upper	 trigram	 is	above,	without,	and	 in	 front.	The	 lines
stressed	in	the	upper	trigram	are	always	characterized	as	“going”;	those	stressed	in	the	lower	trigram,	as
“coming.”

From	 these	 characterizations	 of	 the	 trigrams—already	 in	 use	 in	 the	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision—
there	was	 later	constructed	a	system	of	transforming	the	hexagrams	one	 into	another,	which	has	 led	to
much	confusion.	This	system	is	here	left	wholly	out	of	account,	since	it	is	not	in	any	way	essential	to	the
explanation.	Nor	 has	 any	 use	 been	made	 of	 the	 “hidden”	 hexagrams—i.e.,	 the	 idea	 that	 basically	 each
hexagram	has	its	opposite	hidden	within	it	(for	example,	within	Ch’ien	is	K’un,	within	Chên	is	Sun,	etc.).

But	it	is	decidedly	necessary	to	make	use	of	the	so-called	nuclear	trigrams,	hu	kua.	These	form	the	four
middle	lines	of	each	hexagram,	and	overlap	each	other	so	that	the	middle	line	of	the	one	falls	within	the
other.	An	example	or	two	will	make	this	clear:

The	hexagram	Li,	THE	CLINGING,	FIRE	(30),	shows	a	nuclear	trigram	complex	consisting	of	the	four
lines:

The	two	nuclear	trigrams	are	Tui,	the	Joyous,	as	the	upper	( ),	and	Sun,	the	Gentle,	as	the	lower	(
).

The	hexagram	Chung	Fu,	INNER	TRUTH	(61),	has	for	its	nuclear	trigram	complex	the	four	lines:

Here	the	two	nuclear	trigrams	are	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	as	the	upper	( ),	and	Chên,	the	Arousing,

as	the	lower	( ).
The	structure	of	the	hexagrams	therefore	shows	a	stage-by-stage	overlapping	of	different	trigrams	and

their	influences:



Thus,	in	each	case,	the	beginning	and	the	top	line	are	each	part	of	one	trigram	only—the	lower	and	the
upper	primary	trigram	respectively.	The	second	and	the	fifth	line	belong	each	to	two	trigrams,	the	former
to	the	lower	primary	and	the	lower	nuclear	trigram,	the	latter	to	the	upper	primary	and	the	upper	nuclear
trigram.	The	third	and	the	fourth	line	belong	each	to	three	trigrams—to	the	upper	and	the	lower	primary
trigram	respectively,	and	to	both	of	the	two	nuclear	trigrams.	The	result	is	that	the	beginning	and	the	top
line	tend	in	a	sense	to	drop	out	of	connection,	while	a	state	of	equilibrium,	usually	favorable,	obtains	in
the	case	of	the	second	and	the	fifth	line,	and	the	two	middle	lines	are	conditioned	by	the	fact	that	each
belongs	 to	both	nuclear	 trigrams,	which	disturbs	 the	balance	 in	all	 except	particularly	 favorable	cases.
These	relationships	correspond	exactly	with	the	evaluations	of	the	lines	in	the	appended	judgments.

3.	THE	TIME
The	situation	represented	by	the	hexagram	as	a	whole	is	called	the	time.	This	term	comprises	several

entirely	different	meanings,	according	to	the	character	of	the	various	hexagrams.
In	 hexagrams	 in	 which	 the	 situation	 as	 a	 whole	 has	 to	 do	 with	 movement,	 “the	 time”	 means	 the

decrease	or	growth,	the	emptiness	or	fullness,	brought	about	by	this	movement.	Hexagrams	of	this	sort
are:	T’ai,	PEACE	(11);	P’i,	STANDSTILL	(12);	Po,	SPLITTING	APART	(23);	Fu,	RETURN	(24).

Similarly,	 the	 action	 or	 process	 characteristic	 for	 a	 given	 hexagram	 is	 called	 the	 time,	 as	 in	 Sung,
CONFLICT	 (6),	 Shih,	 THE	 ARMY	 (7),	 Shih	 Ho,	 BITING	 THROUGH	 (21),	 and	 I,	 PROVIDING
NOURISHMENT	(27).

In	addition,	the	time	means	the	law	expressed	through	a	hexagram,	as	in	Lü,	TREADING	(10),	Ch’ien,
MODESTY	(15),	Hsien,	INFLUENCE	(31),	and	Hêng,	DURATION	(32).

Finally,	the	time	may	also	mean	the	symbolic	situation	represented	by	the	hexagram,	as	in	Ching,	THE
WELL	(48),	and	Ting,	THE	CALDRON	(50).

In	all	cases	the	time	of	a	hexagram	is	determinative	for	the	meaning	of	the	situation	as	a	whole,	on	the
basis	of	which	the	individual	lines	receive	their	meaning.	A	given	line—let	us	say,	a	six	in	the	third	place—
can	be	now	favorable,	now	unfavorable,	according	to	the	time	determinant.

4.	THE	PLACES
The	places	occupied	by	the	lines	are	differentiated	as	superior	and	inferior,	according	to	their	relative

elevation.	As	a	rule	the	lowest	and	the	top	line	are	not	taken	into	account,	whereas	the	four	middle	lines
are	active	within	the	time.	Of	these,	the	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	ruler,	and	the	fourth	that	of	the	minister
who	is	close	to	the	ruler.	The	third,	as	the	highest	place	of	the	lower	trigram,	holds	a	sort	of	transitional
position;	the	second	is	that	of	the	official	in	the	country,	who	nevertheless	stands	in	direct	connection	with
the	 prince	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 But	 in	 some	 situations	 the	 fourth	 place	 may	 represent	 the	 wife	 and	 the
second	the	son	of	the	man	represented	by	the	fifth	place.	Under	certain	circumstances	the	second	place
may	be	that	of	the	woman,	active	within	the	house,	while	the	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	husband,	active	in
the	world	without.	In	short,	while	any	of	various	designations	may	be	given	to	a	line	in	a	specific	place,
the	varying	functions	ascribed	to	the	place	are	always	analogous.

As	regards	the	time	of	the	hexagram,	the	lowest	and	the	top	place	as	a	rule	represent	the	beginning
and	the	end.	But	under	certain	circumstances	the	lowest	line	may	also	stand	for	an	individual	beginning	to
take	part	 in	 the	 time	situation	without	having	as	yet	entered	 the	 field	of	action,	while	 the	 top	 line	may
signify	someone	who	has	already	withdrawn	from	the	affairs	of	the	time.	However,	it	depends	on	the	time
represented	by	the	hexagram	whether,	under	some	conditions,	these	very	places	have	a	typical	activity,	as
for	example	the	first	place	in	Chun,	DIFFICULTY	AT	THE	BEGINNING	(3)	and	in	Ta	Yu,	POSSESSION	IN
GREAT	MEASURE	 (14),	 or	 the	 top	 place	 in	 Kuan,	 CONTEMPLATION	 (20),	 in	 Ta	 Ch’u,	 THE	 TAMING
POWER	OF	THE	GREAT	 (26),	 and	 in	 I,	 INCREASE	 (42).	 In	 all	 of	 these	 cases	 the	 lines	 in	 question	 are
rulers	of	the	hexagrams.3	On	the	other	hand,	it	may	also	happen	that	the	fifth	place	is	not	that	of	the	ruler,
as	when,	in	conformity	with	the	situation	indicated	by	the	hexagram	as	a	whole,	no	prince	appears.

5.	THE	CHARACTER	OF	THE	LINES
The	character	of	the	lines	is	designated	as	firm	or	yielding,	as	central,	as	correct,	or	as	not	central	or

not	correct.	The	undivided	lines	are	firm	(or	rigid),	 the	divided	lines	are	yielding	 (or	weak).	The	middle
lines	of	the	two	primary	trigrams,	the	second	and	the	fifth,	are	central	irrespective	of	their	other	qualities.
A	line	is	correct	when	it	stands	in	a	place	appropriate	to	it—e.g.,	a	firm	line	occupying	the	first,	third,	or
fifth	place,	or	a	yielding	line	occupying	the	second,	fourth,	or	sixth	place.

Both	firm	and	yielding	lines	may	be	favorable	or	unfavorable,	according	to	the	time	requirement	of	the
hexagram.	When	the	time	calls	for	firmness,	firm	lines	are	favorable;	when	the	time	requires	giving	way,
yielding	 lines	 are	 favorable.	 This	 holds	 true	 to	 such	 an	 extent	 that	 correctness	 may	 not	 always	 be	 of
advantage.	When	the	time	requires	giving	way,	a	firm	line	in	the	third	place,	although	correct	in	itself,	is
harmful	because	 it	 shows	 too	much	 firmness,	while	conversely	a	yielding	 line	 in	 the	 third	place	can	be
favorable	 because	 its	 yielding	 character	 compensates	 for	 the	 rigidity	 of	 the	 place.	 Only	 the	 central
position	is	favorable	in	the	great	majority	of	cases,	whether	associated	with	correctness	or	not.	A	yielding
ruler	in	particular	may	have	a	very	favorable	position,	especially	when	supported	by	a	strong,	firm	official
in	the	second	place.

6.	THE	RELATIONSHIPS	OF	THE	LINES	TO	ONE	ANOTHER
Correspondence

Lines	occupying	analogous	places	 in	 the	 lower	 and	 the	upper	 trigram	sometimes	have	an	especially
close	relationship,	the	relationship	of	correspondence.	As	a	rule,	firm	lines	Correspond	with	yielding	lines



only,	and	vice	versa.	The	following	 lines,	provided	that	 they	differ	 in	kind,	correspond:	 the	 first	and	the
fourth,	 the	 second	 and	 the	 fifth,	 the	 third	 and	 the	 top	 line.	 Of	 these,	 the	most	 important	 are	 the	 two
central	lines	in	the	second	and	the	fifth	place,	which	stand	in	the	correct	relationship	of	official	to	ruler,
son	 to	 father,	wife	 to	husband.	A	 strong	official	may	be	 in	 the	 relation	of	 correspondence	 to	a	 yielding
ruler,	 or	 a	 yielding	 official	 may	 be	 so	 related	 to	 a	 strong	 ruler.	 The	 former	 is	 the	 case	 in	 sixteen
hexagrams,	in	all	of	which	the	result	is	favorable.	It	is	wholly	favorable	in	hexagrams	4,	7,	11,	14,	18,	19,
32,	34,	38,	40,	41,	46,	50,	and	somewhat	 less	 favorable,	owing	to	the	time	conditions,	 in	hexagrams	26,
54,	64.	The	relationship	of	correspondence	between	a	yielding	official	and	a	strong	ruler	is	not	nearly	so
favorable.	Its	effect	is	quite	unfavorable	in	hexagrams	12,	13,	17,	20,	31.	Difficulties	appear	in	hexagrams
3,	33,	39,	63,	but	as	these	are	explainable	on	the	basis	of	the	time,	the	relationship	in	itself	can	still	be
said	to	be	correct.	The	relationship	acts	favorably	in	hexagrams	8,	25,	37,	42,	45,	49,	53.

Occasionally	there	is	correspondence	also	between	the	first	and	the	fourth	line.	It	is	favorable	when	a
yielding	line	in	the	fourth	place	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	a	strong	first	line,	because	this
means	that	an	obedient	official	seeks	strong,	efficient	assistants	in	the	name	of	his	ruler	(cf.	hexagrams	3,
22,	26,	27,	41).	On	the	other	hand,	correspondence	of	a	strong	fourth	line	with	a	yielding	first	line	would
indicate	a	temptation	to	 intimacy	with	 inferior	persons,	which	should	be	avoided	(cf.	hexagrams	28,	40,
50).	A	relationship	between	the	third	and	the	top	line	hardly	ever	occurs—or	at	most	only	as	a	temptation
—because	an	exalted	sage	who	has	renounced	the	world	would	forfeit	his	purity	if	he	became	entangled	in
worldly	affairs,	and	an	official	in	the	third	place	would	forfeit	his	loyalty	if	he	passed	by	his	ruler	in	the
fifth	place.

Of	course	when	a	line	is	a	ruler	of	a	hexagram,	there	occur	relationships	of	correspondence	that	are
independent	of	these	considerations,	and	the	good	fortune	or	misfortune	implied	by	them	is	determined
by	the	time	significance	of	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.

Holding	Together
Between	two	adjacent	lines	of	different	character	there	may	occur	a	relationship	of	holding	together,

which	 is	 also	 described	with	 respect	 to	 the	 lower	 line	 as	 “receiving”	 and	with	 respect	 to	 the	 upper	 as
“resting	upon.”	As	regards	the	relationship	of	holding	together,	the	fourth	and	the	fifth	line	(minister	and
ruler)	are	of	 first	 importance.	Here,	 in	contradistinction	 to	 the	 situation	 respecting	 the	 second	and	 the
fifth	line,	it	is	more	favorable	for	a	yielding	minister	to	hold	together	with	a	strong	ruler,	because	in	this
closer	proximity	reverence	is	of	value.	Thus	in	sixteen	hexagrams	in	which	this	type	of	holding	together
occurs,	it	is	always	more	or	less	auspicious:	it	is	very	favorable	in	hexagrams	8,	9,	20,	29,	37,	42,	48,	53,
57,	59,	60,	61	and	somewhat	less	favorable	but	not	altogether	unfavorable	in	hexagrams	3,	5,	39,	63.	But
the	holding	together	of	a	strong,	i.e.,	an	incorrect	line	in	the	fourth	place	with	a	yielding	ruler	is	generally
unfavorable,	as	in	hexagrams	30,	32,	35,	50,	51;	it	is	somewhat	less	unfavorable	in	hexagrams	14,	38,	40,
54,	56,	62.	Conversely,	 it	 is	 favorable	 in	certain	hexagrams	 in	which	 the	strong	 fourth	 line	 is	 the	ruler:
these	are	hexagrams	16,	21,	34,	55	(here	the	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	upper	trigram),	64.

In	addition,	the	relationship	of	holding	together	occurs	also	between	the	fifth	and	the	top	line.	Here	it
pictures	a	ruler	placing	himself	under	a	sage;	in	such	a	case	it	is	usually	a	humble	ruler	(a	weak	line	in	the
fifth	 place)	 who	 reveres	 a	 strong	 sage	 (a	 strong	 line	 above),	 as	 in	 hexagrams	 14,	 26,	 27,	 50.	 This	 is
naturally	 very	 favorable.	 But	when,	 conversely,	 a	 strong	 line	 stands	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	with	 a	weak	 one
above	it,	this	points	rather	to	association	with	inferior	elements	and	is	undesirable,	as	in	hexagrams	28,
31,	 43,	 58.	 The	 only	 exception	 to	 this	 appears	 in	 hexagram	 17,	 Sui,	 FOLLOWING,	 because	 the	 total
meaning	 of	 the	 hexagram	 presupposes	 that	 the	 strong	 element	 descends	 to	 a	 place	 under	 the	 weak
element.

The	remaining	lines,	the	first	and	second,	the	second	and	third,	the	third	and	fourth,	do	not	stand	in
the	correct	relationship	of	holding	together.	Where	this	occurs	it	always	implies	a	danger	of	factionalism
and	is	to	be	avoided.	For	a	weak	line,	resting	upon	a	firm	line	is	even	at	times	a	source	of	trouble.

In	 dealing	 with	 lines	 that	 are	 rulers	 of	 their	 hexagrams,	 correspondence	 and	 holding	 together	 are
taken	 into	 account	 regardless	 of	 the	 places	 of	 the	 lines.	 Besides	 the	 above-mentioned	 instances,	 other
examples	may	be	cited.	In	Yü,	ENTHUSIASM	(16),	the	fourth	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	first
line	corresponds	with	it,	and	the	third	holds	together	with	it.	In	Po,	SPLITTING	APART	(23),	the	top	line	is
the	 ruler;	 the	 third	 corresponds	 with	 it,	 the	 fifth	 holds	 together	 with	 it,	 and	 both	 these	 factors	 are
favorable.	 In	Fu,	RETURN	 (24),	 the	 first	 line	 is	 the	 ruler;	 the	 second	holds	 together	with	 it,	 the	 fourth
corresponds	 with	 it,	 and	 both	 these	 relationships	 are	 favorable.	 In	 Kuai,	 BREAK-THROUGH
(RESOLUTENESS)	(43),	the	top	line	is	the	ruler,	the	third	corresponds	with	it,	and	the	fifth	holds	together
with	it.	And	in	Kou,	COMING	TO	MEET	(44),	the	first	line	is	the	ruler,	the	second	holds	together	with	it,
the	fourth	corresponds	with	it.	Here	good	fortune	and	misfortune	are	determined	according	to	the	trend
indicated	by	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram.

7.	THE	RULERS	OF	THE	HEXAGRAMS
Distinction	is	made	between	two	kinds	of	rulers,	constituting	and	governing.	The	constituting	ruler	of

the	hexagram	is	that	line	which	gives	the	hexagram	its	characteristic	meaning,	regardless	of	whether	or
not	the	line	indicates	nobility	and	goodness	of	character.	The	weak	top	line	in	hexagram	43,	Kuai,	BREAK-
THROUGH	(RESOLUTENESS)	is	an	example,	for	the	idea	that	this	line	is	resolutely	to	be	cast	out	is	the
constituting	factor	in	the	hexagram.

Governing	rulers	are	always	of	good	character	and	become	rulers	by	virtue	of	 their	position	and	the
meaning	 of	 the	 time.	Usually	 they	 are	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 but	 occasionally	 lines	 in	 other	 places	may	 be
governing	rulers.

When	the	constituting	ruler	is	at	the	same	time	the	governing	ruler,	the	line	is	certain	to	be	good	and



to	be	in	the	place	appropriate	to	the	time.	When	it	is	not	the	governing	ruler	as	well,	it	is	a	sure	sign	that
its	character	and	place	do	not	accord	with	the	demands	of	the	time.

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	can	always	be	determined	from	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision.4	When	the
constituting	ruler	and	the	governing	ruler	are	identical,	the	hexagram	has	one	ruler;	otherwise	it	has	two.
Often	 there	are	 two	 lines	constituting	 the	meaning	of	 the	hexagram,	as	 for	 instance	 the	 two	advancing
weak	lines	in	hexagram	33,	Tun,	RETREAT;	these	are	both	rulers	because	they	are	pushing	back	the	four
strong	lines.	If	the	hexagram	is	produced	by	the	interaction	of	the	images	of	the	primary	trigrams,	the	two
lines	respectively	characterizing	the	trigrams	are	the	rulers.

The	constituting	ruler	in	the	hexagram	is	designated	by	a	square	( ),	the	governing	ruler	by	a	circle	(
).	When	the	two	are	identical,	only	the	circle	is	used.	In	book	III,	moreover,	a	detailed	interpretation	of

the	ruler	appears	in	connection	with	each	hexagram.



BOOK	III:
THE	COMMENTARIES

PART	I



1.	Ch’ien	/	The	Creative

1

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	THE	CREATIVE	indicates	the	way	of	heaven,
and	the	fifth	place	is	the	symbol	of	heaven.	THE	CREATIVE	also	indicates	the	way	of	the	superior	man,
and	 the	 fifth	 place,	 as	 that	 of	 the	 ruler,	 is	 his	 appropriate	 place.	Moreover,	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place
possesses	 the	 four	 attributes	 of	 firmness,	 strength,	moderation	 (central	 position	 in	 the	 upper	 trigram),
and	 justice	 (correctness,	 the	 yang	 element	 being	 in	 the	 yang	 place).	 Hence	 this	 line	 possesses	 the
character	of	heaven	in	all	its	perfection.

This	hexagram	is	correlated	with	the	fourth	month	(May–June),	because	the	light-giving	power	is	then
at	its	zenith.

Miscellaneous	Notes	on	the	Hexagrams2
THE	CREATIVE	is	strong.

Strength	and	 firmness	constitute	 the	character	of	 this	hexagram.	 Its	 image	 is	 the	 trigram	of	heaven
doubled,	that	is,	two	successive	rotations	or	days.	It	is	made	up	of	positive	lines	only.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CREATIVE	works	sublime	success,
Furthering	through	perseverance.
Commentary	on	the	Decision3

NOTE.	 This	 commentary,	 no	 doubt	 correctly	 ascribed	 to	 Confucius,	 explains	 the	 names	 of	 the
hexagrams	as	well	as	 the	words	appended	by	King	Wên	to	the	hexagram	as	a	whole	[the	Judgment].	 In
general,	the	commentary	first	explains	the	name	of	the	hexagram,	taking	into	consideration	as	occasion
demands	its	character,	its	image,	and	its	structure.	Next	it	elucidates	the	words	of	King	Wên,	either	using
the	sources	just	named	or	else	starting	from	the	situation	of	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	or	from	the	change
of	form	that	has	given	rise	to	the	hexagram.

No	explanation	of	the	names	of	the	eight	primary	trigrams	is	given;	because	it	is	assumed	that	this	is
known.

In	the	Chinese,	the	sentences	in	this	commentary	are	for	the	most	part	rhymed,	probably	in	order	to
make	it	easier	to	remember	them.	The	rhymes	have	not	been	reproduced	in	this	translation,	because	they
are	 of	 no	material	 significance.	However,	 it	 is	well	 to	 remember	 the	 circumstance,	 because	 it	 explains
much	of	the	abruptness	in	the	style,	which	is	often	somewhat	forced.

Great	indeed	is	the	sublimity	of	the	Creative,	to	which	all	beings	owe	their	beginning	and	which
permeates	all	heaven.4
The	commentary	separates	 the	two	pairs	of	attributes	given	 in	 the	Judgment	 into	 the	 four	 individual

attributes	of	the	creative	power,	whose	visible	form	is	heaven.	The	first	attribute	 is	sublimity,	which,	as
the	primal	cause	of	all	that	exists,	forms	the	most	important	and	most	inclusive	attribute	of	the	Creative.
The	root	meaning	of	the	Chinese	word	for	it—yüan—is	literally	“head.”

The	clouds	pass	and	the	rain	does	its	work,	and	all	individual	beings	flow	into	their	forms.
This	explains	 the	expression	 “success.”	The	success	of	 the	creative	activity	 is	 revealed	 in	 the	gift	 of

water,	 which	 causes	 the	 germination	 and	 sprouting	 of	 all	 living	 things.	 The	 first	 passage	 tells	 of	 the
beginning	of	all	beings	in	general;	here	the	separate	species	in	their	particular	forms	are	instanced.	These
two	passages	show	the	attributes	of	greatness	and	success	as	 they	manifest	 themselves	 in	 the	creative
force	in	nature.	The	attributes	of	sublimity	and	success	take	shape	correspondingly	in	the	creative	man,
the	sage,	who	is	in	harmony	with	the	creative	power	of	the	godhead.

Because	the	holy	man	is	clear	as	to	the	end	and	the	beginning,	as	to	the	way	in	which	each	of	the
six	 stages	 completes	 itself	 in	 its	 own	 time,	 he	 mounts	 on	 them	 toward	 heaven	 as	 though	 on	 six
dragons.
The	holy	man,	who	understands	the	mysteries	of	creation	inherent	in	end	and	beginning,	in	death	and

life,	 in	 dissolution	 and	growth,	 and	who	understands	 how	 these	 polar	 opposites	 condition	 one	 another,
becomes	superior	to	the	limitations	of	the	transitory.	For	him,	the	meaning	of	time	is	that	in	it	the	stages
of	growth	can	unfold	in	a	clear	sequence.	He	is	mindful	at	every	moment	and	uses	the	six	stages	of	growth
as	 if	 they	 were	 six	 dragons	 (the	 image	 attributed	 to	 the	 individual	 lines)	 on	 which	 he	mounts	 toward
heaven.	This	is	the	sublimity	and	success	of	the	Creative	as	it	shows	itself	in	man.

The	way	of	the	Creative	works	through	change	and	transformation,	so	that	each	thing	receives	its
true	nature	and	destiny	and	comes	into	permanent	accord	with	Great	Harmony:	this	is	what	furthers
and	what	perseveres.
Here	the	two	other	attributes,	power	to	further	and	power	to	persevere,	are	explained	in	their	relation

to	 the	 creative	 force	 in	 nature.	 The	 mode	 of	 the	 creative	 is	 not	 rest	 but	 continuous	 movement	 and
development.	Through	this	force,	all	things	are	gradually	changed	until	they	are	completely	transformed
in	their	manifestation.	Thus	the	seasons	and	all	living	beings	change	and	alternate	in	their	course.	In	this
way	 each	 thing	 receives	 the	 nature	 appropriate	 to	 it,	 which,	 from	 the	 divine	 viewpoint,	 is	 called	 its
appointed	destiny.	This	explains	the	concept	of	furthering.	With	each	thing	thus	finding	its	mode,	a	great
and	lasting	harmony	arises	in	the	world:	this	is	expressed	in	the	concept	of	perseverance	(lastingness	and



integrity).
He	towers	high	above	the	multitude	of	beings,	and	all	lands	are	united	in	peace.

This	describes	the	creative	power	of	the	holy	man,	who	makes	it	possible	for	everything	to	attain	 its
appropriate	place,	thus	bringing	about	peace	on	earth,	when	he	occupies	an	eminent	ruling	place.

In	 all	 these	 explanations	 there	 is	 an	 evident	 parallelism	 between	 the	 Creative	 in	 nature	 and	 the
Creative	in	the	world	of	man.	What	is	said	about	the	Creative	in	nature	is	based	on	the	image	of	heaven
symbolized	 by	 the	 hexagram.	Heaven	 shows	 the	 strong,	 ceaseless	movement	 that	 by	 its	 nature	 causes
everything	to	happen	in	due	time.	The	words	about	the	Creative	in	man	are	based	on	the	position	of	the
ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	The	“flying	dragon	in	the	heavens”	is	the	image	of	the
sublimity	and	 success	of	 the	holy	 ruler.	The	eminent	place	held	by	 the	holy	man,	 through	which	peace
comes	to	the	world,	has	its	basis	in	the	line,	“It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.”

Commentary	on	the	Images5
NOTE.	 This	 commentary,	 starting	 with	 the	 combination	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams,	 deduces	 from	 it	 the

situation	represented	by	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.	With	the	attributes	of	the	two	trigrams	as	a	basis,	 it
then	gives	advice	for	correct	behavior	in	this	situation.

THE	IMAGE
The	movement	of	heaven	is	full	of	power.
Thus	the	superior	man	makes	himself	strong	and	untiring.

The	doubling	of	the	trigram	Ch’ien,	the	Creative,	gives	the	image	of	powerful	and	constantly	repeated
movement.	The	doubling	suggests	that	one	draws	strength	from	within	oneself,	and	that	after	each	action
a	new	one	follows,	without	cease.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Hidden	dragon.	Do	not	act.
b)	“Hidden	dragon.	Do	not	act.”	For	the	light-giving	force	is	still	below.

The	lowest	place	is	as	it	were	still	wholly	beneath	the	earth,	hence	the	idea	of	something	hidden.	But
since	the	line	is	undivided,	the	image	chosen	is	the	dragon,	the	symbol	of	the	light-giving	force.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man
b)	“Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.”	Already	the	influence	of	character	reaches	far.

The	second	place	stands	for	the	surface	of	the	earth,	hence	the	idea	of	a	field.	Appearing	in	the	field
and	seeing	the	great	man	are	indicated	by	the	influential	character	of	the	line,	since	it	holds	the	center	of
the	 lower	 trigram	 and	 is	moreover	 related	 to	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram	 through	 place	 and	 affinity	 of
nature.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	All	day	long	the	superior	man	is	creatively	active.	At	nightfall	his	mind	is	still	beset	with	cares.
Danger.	No	blame.

b)	“All	day	long	the	superior	man	is	creatively	active.”
One	goes	to	and	fro	on	the	right	path.

The	third	place,	as	the	place	of	transition	from	the	lower	to	the	upper	trigram,	is	naturally	unsettled
and	therefore	frequently	not	exactly	favorable.	Here,	however,	owing	to	the	uniform	character	of	all	the
lines,	the	transition	is	merely	a	sign	of	tireless	activity	leading	to	and	fro	on	the	path	to	truth.	“To	and	fro”
means	that	one	is	only	beginning	to	acquire	moral	stability.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Wavering	flight	over	the	depths.	No	blame.
b)	“Wavering	flight	over	the	depths.”	Advance	is	not	a	mistake.

Here	we	reach	the	upper	limit	of	what	pertains	to	man	in	the	hexagram.	Advance	on	level	ground	is	no
longer	possible.	 In	order	to	advance,	a	man	must	dare	to	relinquish	his	 foothold	on	earth	and	soar	 into
realms	 of	 uncharted	 space	 and	 utter	 solitude.	 Here	 the	 individual	 is	 free—precisely	 because	 of	 the
possibilities	inherent	in	the	position.	Each	man	must	determine	his	own	fate.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Flying	dragon	in	the	heavens.	It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
b)	“Flying	dragon	in	the	heavens.”	This	shows	the	great	man	at	work.

Here	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	hexagram	 is	 in	 the	place	which	 is	 preeminently	 that	 of	 the	 ruler.	Hence	he	 is
symbolized	by	a	dragon	flying	in	the	sky.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.
b)	“Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.”	For	what	is	at	the	full	cannot	last.

By	the	law	of	change,	whatever	has	reached	its	extreme	must	turn	back.
When	all	the	lines	are	nines:

	
a)	There	appears	a	flight	of	dragons	without	heads.
Good	fortune.



b)	“All	the	lines	are	nines.”	It	is	the	nature	of	heaven	not	to	appear	as	head.
The	 Creative	 does	 indeed	 guide	 all	 happenings,	 but	 it	 never	 becomes	 manifest;	 it	 never	 behaves

outwardly	as	the	leader.	Thus	true	strength	is	that	strength	which,	mobile	as	it	is	hidden,	concentrates	on
the	work	without	being	outwardly	visible.	Since	all	the	lines	are	nines,	the	hexagram	Ch’ien	changes	into
the	hexagram,	K’un,	THE	RECEPTIVE,	which	is	wholly	receptive;	hence	no	head	is	showing.

Commentary	on	the	Words	of	the	Text6
NOTE.	This	wing	consists	of	four	commentaries	on	the	first	two	hexagrams	in	the	Book	of	Changes.	Of

these,	two	commentaries	deal	with	the	text	referring	to	the	hexagram	as	a	whole	[the	Judgment]	and	also
with	 the	T’uan	Chuan	 [Commentary	 on	 the	Decision],	while	 all	 four	 also	 elucidate	 the	 individual	 lines.
[The	commentaries,	here	designated	as	a,	b,	c,	and	d,	contain	a	different	number	of	sections	each.]	In	the
original	text	the	sequence	is	arranged	as	follows:	a,	1–9;	b,	1–7;	c,	1–7;	d,	1–12.	In	the	presentation	below,
for	the	sake	of	clarity	and	to	avoid	unnecessary	repetition,	the	different	commentaries	pertaining	to	the
respective	hexagrams	have	been	arranged	together,	and	are	distinguishable	by	the	classifying	letters	and
numerals.

On	the	Hexagram	as	a	Whole
a)	1.	Of	 all	 that	 is	 good,	 sublimity	 is	 supreme.	Succeeding	 is	 the	 coming	 together	 of	 all	 that	 is

beautiful.	 Furtherance	 is	 the	 agreement	 of	 all	 that	 is	 just.	 Perseverance	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 all
actions.
Here	 the	 four	 fundamental	 attributes	 of	 the	 hexagram	 are	 related	 to	 the	 four	 cardinal	 virtues	 of

Chinese	 ethics.	 Sublimity	 is	 correlated	 with	 humaneness,	 success	 with	 the	 mores,	 furtherance	 with
justice,	and	perseverance	with	wisdom.7

a)	 2.	 Because	 the	 superior	 man	 embodies	 humaneness,	 he	 is	 able	 to	 govern	men.	 Because	 he
brings	about	the	harmonious	working	together	of	all	that	is	beautiful,	he	is	able	to	unite	them	through
the	mores.	 Because	 he	 furthers	 all	 beings,	 he	 is	 able	 to	 bring	 them	 into	 harmony	 through	 justice.
Because	he	is	persevering	and	firm,	he	is	able	to	carry	out	all	actions.
The	four	fundamental	attributes	of	the	Creative	are	likewise	the	attributes	necessary	to	a	leader	and

ruler	of	men.	 In	order	 to	rule	and	 lead	men,	 the	 first	essential	 is	 to	have	humane	 feeling	 toward	them.
Without	 humaneness,	 nothing	 lasting	 can	 be	 accomplished	 in	 the	 sphere	 of	 authority.	 Power	 that
influences	through	fear	works	only	for	the	moment	and	necessarily	arouses	resistance	as	a	countereffect.

On	 the	 basis	 of	 this	 conception,	 it	 follows	 that	 the	mores	 are	 the	 instrument	 by	which	men	 can	 be
brought	into	union.	For	nothing	binds	people	more	firmly	together	than	deeply	rooted	social	usages	that
are	observed	because	they	appear	to	each	member	of	society	as	something	beautiful	and	worth	striving
for.

Wherever	it	is	possible	to	construct	a	framework	of	mores	in	which	each	person	feels	content,	it	is	easy
to	unify	and	organize	the	masses.	Furthermore,	as	the	foundation	of	social	life	there	must	be	the	greatest
possible	 freedom	 and	 the	 greatest	 possible	 advantage	 for	 all.	 These	 are	 guaranteed	 by	 justice,	 which
curtails	individual	freedom	no	more	than	is	absolutely	necessary	for	the	general	welfare.	Finally,	to	reach
the	 desired	 goals,	 there	 is	 the	 fourth	 requisite	 of	 wisdom,	 manifesting	 itself	 by	 pointing	 out	 the
established	and	enduring	paths	that,	according	to	immutable	cosmic	laws,	must	lead	to	success.

a)	 3.	 The	 superior	 man	 acts	 in	 accordance	 with	 these	 four	 virtues.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 said:	 The
Creative	is	sublime,	successful,	furthering,	persevering.

d)	1.	The	sublimity	of	the	Creative	depends	on	the	fact	that	it	begins	everything	and	has	success.
d)	2.	Furtherance	and	perseverance:	thus	it	brings	about	the	nature	and	way	of	all	beings.

Here	 the	 attributes	 are	 again	 summed	 up	 in	 pairs.	 The	 sublimity	 of	 the	 Creative	 depends	 on	 its
absoluteness,	on	the	fact	that	it	is	the	beginning	of	all	things—for	it	is	not	itself	conditioned	by	anything
else—and	that	it	is	the	active	principle,	i.e.,	it	is	itself	the	cause	of	all	else.	Furtherance	and	perseverance
—meaning	the	urge	to	life,	and	the	fixed	laws	of	nature—reveal	the	causality	of	the	Creative	in	its	efficacy.
The	urge	to	 life—that	which	 furthers	and	 is	right	 for	each	being—lays	the	 foundation	of	 its	nature,	and
this	nature	acts	according	to	fixed	laws:	this	is	the	way	of	all	beings.	In	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision
nature	is	traced	back	to	its	origin	in	the	divine	decree;	here	nature	is	shown	in	its	mode	of	action.

d)	 3.	 The	Creative,	 by	positing	 the	beginning,	 is	 able	 to	 further	 the	world	with	beauty.	 Its	 true
greatness	lies	in	the	fact	that	nothing	is	said	about	the	means	by	which	it	furthers.
Of	the	Creative	it	is	said	only	that	it	furthers	by	virtue	of	what	eternally	belongs	to	it,	by	virtue	of	its

very	nature.	This	nature	is	not	defined	more	exactly.	In	this	lies	the	suggestion	of	the	infinite	possibilities
and	aspects	of	its	benefits.	The	Receptive	forms	a	contrast	to	this,	because	it	is	said:	“It	furthers	through
the	 perseverance	 of	 a	mare.”	 In	 the	 phenomenal	 world,	 each	 thing	 has	 its	 specific	 nature:	 this	 is	 the
principle	 of	 individuation.	 At	 the	 same	 time	 this	 specific	 nature	 fixes	 a	 boundary	 that	 separates	 each
individual	being	from	every	other.

d)	 4.	 How	 great	 indeed	 is	 the	 Creative!	 It	 is	 firm	 and	 strong,	 moderate	 and	 correct,	 pure,
unalloyed	and	spiritual.
Here	the	attributes	of	the	whole	hexagram	are	deduced	from	the	nature	of	its	ruler,	the	nine	in	the	fifth

place,	 as	 is	 frequently	 the	 case	 in	 the	T’uan	Chuan,	 Commentary	 on	 the	Decision,	 to	which	 the	 entire
passage	 refers.	 The	 fifth	 line	 is	 firm	 because	 it	 is	 in	 an	 uneven	 place,	 strong	 because	 it	 is	 undivided
(strong	 means	 movement,	 firm	 means	 rest);	 it	 is	 moderate	 because	 it	 is	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 upper
trigram,	correct	because	it	stands	in	its	appropriate	place—a	strong	line	in	a	strong	place.	In	these	four
attributes	 the	 four	 cardinal	 attributes	 of	 the	 hexagram	 are	 revealed	 once	 more.	 These	 attributes	 are
present	in	pure,	unalloyed,	and	spiritual	form	because	the	hexagram	consists	of	strong	lines	only.

d)	5.	The	six	individual	lines	open	up	and	unfold	the	thought,	so	that	the	character	of	the	whole	is



explained	through	its	different	sides.
Because	of	the	unity	of	the	hexagram,	the	individual	lines	stand	in	a	continuous	relationship	that,	as	it

progresses,	 clarifies	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 whole	 still	 further.	 In	 this	 respect	 the	 hexagram	 Ch’ien,	 THE
CREATIVE,	forms	a	contrast	to	K’un,	THE	RECEPTIVE,	in	which	the	single	lines	stand	side	by	side	without
inner	relationship.	This	inheres	in	the	temporal	character	of	THE	CREATIVE	as	contrasted	with	the	spatial
character	of	THE	RECEPTIVE.

d)	 6.	 “In	 his	 own	 time	he	mounts	 toward	heaven	 on	 six	 dragons.	 The	 clouds	 pass	 and	 the	 rain
falls.”	All	this	means	peace	coming	to	the	world.
Because	 of	 this	 closing	 remark,	 the	 corresponding	 passage	 in	 the	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision	 is

interpreted	as	a	reference	to	historical	events,	namely,	the	ordering	of	the	empire.
On	the	Lines

On	nine	at	the	beginning:
a)	 4.	 Nine	 at	 the	 beginning	means:	 “Hidden	 dragon.	 Do	 not	 act.”	What	 does	 this	 signify?	 The

Master	said:
This	 means	 a	 person	 who	 has	 the	 character	 of	 a	 dragon	 but	 remains	 concealed.	 He	 does	 not

change	to	suit	the	outside	world;	he	makes	no	name	for	himself.	He	withdraws	from	the	world,	yet	is
not	 sad	 about	 it.	 He	 receives	 no	 recognition,	 yet	 is	 not	 sad	 about	 it.	 If	 lucky,	 he	 carries	 out	 his
principles;	if	unlucky,	he	withdraws	with	them.	Verily,	he	cannot	be	uprooted;	he	is	a	hidden	dragon.

b)	1.	“Hidden	dragon.	Do	not	act.”	The	reason	is	that	he	is	below.
c)	 1.	 “Hidden	 dragon.	 Do	 not	 act.”	 The	 power	 of	 the	 light	 principle	 is	 still	 covered	 up	 and

concealed.
d)	7.	The	superior	man	acts	 in	accordance	with	the	character	that	has	become	perfected	within

him.	This	is	a	way	of	life	that	can	submit	to	scrutiny	on	any	day.
Being	hidden	means	that	he	is	still	in	concealment	and	not	given	recognition,	that	if	he	should	act

he	would	not	as	yet	accomplish	anything.	In	this	case	the	superior	man	does	not	act.
On	nine	in	the	second	place:
a)	5.	Nine	in	the	second	place	means:	“Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.	 It	 furthers	one	to	see	the

great	man.”	What	does	this	signify?
The	Master	 said:	 This	 means	 a	 man	 who	 has	 the	 character	 of	 a	 dragon	 and	 is	 moderate	 and

correct.	Even	in	ordinary	speech	he	is	reliable.	Even	in	ordinary	actions	he	is	careful.	He	does	away
with	what	 is	 false	and	preserves	his	 integrity.	He	 improves	his	era	and	does	not	boast	about	 it.	His
character	is	influential	and	transforms	men.

In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.	It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great
man.”	This	refers	to	a	man	who	has	the	qualities	of	a	ruler.

b)	2.	“Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.”	The	reason	is	that	he	is	not	needed	as	yet.
c)	2.	“Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.”	Through	him	the	whole	world	attains	beauty	and	clarity.
d)	8.	The	superior	man	learns	in	order	to	gather	material;	he	questions	in	order	to	sift	it.	Thus	he

becomes	generous	in	nature	and	kindly	in	his	actions.
In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“Dragon	appearing	in	the	field.	It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great

man.”	For	he	has	the	qualities	of	a	ruler.
On	nine	in	the	third	place:
a)	6.	Nine	in	the	third	place	means:	“All	day	long	the	superior	man	is	creatively	active.	At	nightfall

his	mind	is	still	beset	with	cares.	Danger.	No	blame.”	What	does	this	signify?
The	Master	 said:	The	superior	man	 improves	his	 character	and	 labors	at	his	 task.	 It	 is	 through

loyalty	and	 faith	 that	he	 fosters	his	character.	By	working	on	his	words,	 so	 that	 they	 rest	 firmly	on
truth,	he	makes	his	work	enduring.	He	knows	how	this	is	to	be	achieved	and	achieves	it;	in	this	way	he
is	able	to	plant	the	right	seed.	He	knows	how	it	 is	to	be	brought	to	completion	and	so	completes	it;
thereby	he	is	able	to	make	it	truly	enduring.	For	this	reason	he	is	not	proud	in	his	superior	position
nor	 disappointed	 in	 an	 inferior	 one.	 Thus	 he	 is	 creatively	 active	 and,	 as	 circumstances	 demand,
careful,	so	that	even	in	a	dangerous	situation	he	does	not	make	a	mistake.

b)	3.	“All	day	long	he	is	creatively	active.”	This	is	the	way	in	which	he	carries	out	his	undertakings.
c)	3.	“All	day	long	he	is	creatively	active.”	He	moves	with	the	time.
d)	9.	The	nine	in	the	third	place	shows	redoubled	firmness	and	is	moreover	not	in	a	central	place.

On	 the	one	hand,	 it	 is	 not	 yet	 in	 the	heavens	above;	 on	 the	other	hand,	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 in	 the	 field
below.	Therefore	one	must	be	creatively	active	and,	as	circumstances	demand,	careful.	Then,	despite
the	danger,	no	mistake	is	made.

On	nine	in	the	fourth	place:
a)	7.	Nine	in	the	fourth	place	means:	“Wavering	flight	over	the	depths.	No	blame.”	What	does	this

signify?
The	Master	said:	In	ascent	or	descent	there	is	no	fixed	rule,	except	that	one	must	do	nothing	evil.

In	advance	or	retreat	no	sustained	perseverance	avails,	except	that	one	must	not	depart	 from	one’s
nature.	The	superior	man	fosters	his	character	and	labors	at	his	task,	in	order	to	do	everything	at	the
right	time.	Therefore	he	makes	no	mistake.

b)	4.	“Wavering	flight	over	the	depths.”	He	tests	his	powers.
c)	4.	“Wavering	flight	over	the	depths.”	Here	the	way	of	the	Creative	is	about	to	transform	itself.
d)	10.	The	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	too	rigid	and	not	moderate.	It	is	not	yet	in	the	heavens	above,

neither	is	it	any	longer	in	the	field	below	nor	in	the	middle	regions	of	the	human.	Therefore	it	is	said:
“Wavering	flight	…”	To	waver	means	that	one	has	freedom	of	choice,	therefore	one	makes	no	mistake.

On	nine	in	the	fifth	place:
a)	8.	Nine	in	the	fifth	place	means:	“Flying	dragon	in	the	heavens.	It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great



man.”	What	does	this	signify?
The	Master	 said:	 Things	 that	 accord	 in	 tone	 vibrate	 together.	 Things	 that	 have	 affinity	 in	 their

inmost	nature	seek	one	another.	Water	flows	to	what	is	wet,	fire	turns	to	what	is	dry.	Clouds	follow	the
dragon,	wind	follows	the	tiger.	Thus	the	sage	rises,	and	all	creatures	follow	him	with	their	eyes.	What
is	born	of	heaven	feels	related	to	what	is	above.	What	is	born	of	earth	feels	related	to	what	is	below.
Each	follows	its	kind.

b)	5.	“Flying	dragon	in	the	heavens.”	This	is	the	supreme	way	of	ruling.
c)	5.	“Flying	dragon	in	the	heavens.”	This	is	the	place	appropriate	to	heavenly	character.
d)	11.	The	great	man	accords	in	his	character	with	heaven	and	earth;	in	his	light,	with	the	sun	and

moon;	in	his	consistency,	with	the	four	seasons;	in	the	good	and	evil	fortune	that	he	creates,	with	gods
and	 spirits.	When	 he	 acts	 in	 advance	 of	 heaven,	 heaven	 does	 not	 contradict	 him.	When	 he	 follows
heaven,	he	adapts	himself	to	the	time	of	heaven.	If	heaven	itself	does	not	resist	him,	how	much	less	do
men,	gods,	and	spirits!

On	nine	at	the	top:
a)	9.	Nine	at	the	top	means:	“Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.”	What	does	this	signify?
The	Master	said:	He	who	is	noble	and	has	no	corresponding	position,	he	who	stands	high	and	has

no	following,	he	who	has	able	people	under	him	who	do	not	have	his	support,	that	man	will	have	cause
for	regret	at	every	turn.

b)	6.	“Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.”	Everything	that	goes	to	extremes	meets	with
misfortune.

c)	6.	“Arrogant	dragon	will	have	cause	to	repent.”	In	time	he	exhausts	himself.
d)	12.	Arrogance	means	that	one	knows	how	to	press	forward	but	not	how	to	draw	back,	that	one

knows	existence	but	not	annihilation,	knows	something	about	winning	but	nothing	about	losing.
It	is	only	the	holy	man	who	understands	how	to	press	forward	and	how	to	draw	back,	who	knows

existence	and	annihilation	as	well,	without	losing	his	true	nature.	The	holy	man	alone	can	do	this.
On	all	the	nines	changing:
b)	7.	When	THE	CREATIVE,	the	great,	undergoes	change	in	all	the	nines,	the	world	is	set	in	order.
c)	7.	When	THE	CREATIVE,	the	great,	undergoes	change	in	all	the	nines,	one	perceives	the	law	of

heaven.
NOTE.	 The	 hexagram	 Ch’ien,	 THE	 CREATIVE,	 occupies	 a	 unique	 position,	 in	 that	 it	 is	 uniformly

composed	of	 firm	 lines	all	having	a	certain	relation	 to	one	another.	They	 form	a	sequence	of	stages,	so
that	 a	 genetic	 development	 in	 time	 can	 be	 observed.	 For	 this	 reason	 the	 judgments	 attached	 to	 the
individual	lines	in	this	hexagram	differ	from	those	pertaining	to	any	of	the	other	hexagrams.	In	the	case	of
THE	 CREATIVE,	 there	 can	 be	 no	 question	 of	 relationships	 of	 correspondence	 and	 holding	 together8
between	 firm	and	 yielding	 lines,	 such	as	determine	 the	 character	 of	 the	 other	hexagrams;	 instead,	 the
judgment	takes	into	account	solely	the	relation	of	the	place	to	the	nature	of	the	line.

A	characteristic	difference	between	the	upper	and	the	lower	trigram	is	to	be	noted.	The	lower	pictures
the	 development	 of	 the	 character	 of	 the	 creative	 power;	 the	 upper,	 the	 development	 of	 the	 external
position.	The	first	line	and	the	fourth	each	mark	a	beginning.	The	first	line,	at	the	very	bottom,	still	within
the	realm	of	earth	(first	and	second	places),	is	designated	as	hidden,	latent.	The	fourth	line,	in	the	lowest
place	of	the	upper	trigram,	likewise	indicates	a	beginning,	that	is,	a	changing	of	position.	In	themselves,
the	omens	for	this	line	are	not	favorable.	Being	firm	in	a	yielding	place,	the	line	does	not	fit	its	place,	and
this	 might	 well	 imply	 a	 defect	 somewhere.	 But	 because	 the	 essence	 of	 the	 Creative	 is	 strength,	 it	 is
explicitly	emphasized	that	there	is	no	mistake.	The	divergence	between	the	character	and	the	place	of	the
line	manifests	itself	instead	in	the	potentiality	of	the	decision,	which	is	still	in	doubt.

The	 middle	 lines	 in	 the	 two	 trigrams,	 the	 second	 and	 the	 fifth,	 are	 extraordinarily	 favorable.	 The
second	line	is	central	and	as	such	is	immediately	to	be	conceived	as	correct.	Since	it	is	still	in	the	lower
trigram,	it	shows	the	inner	nature	of	the	great	man,	who	is	already	becoming	known	(“in	the	field”)	but
does	not	yet	hold	an	appropriate	position.	He	must	see	the	“great	man”	in	the	fifth	place,	with	whom	he	is
connected	by	kinship	of	character,	and	who,	as	ruler	of	the	whole,	can	assign	him	the	position	suitable	to
him.	These	favorable	omens	hold	in	regard	to	the	fifth	line	in	a	yet	more	marked	degree.	The	second	line
shows	the	strong	man	in	a	weak,	lowly	place;	in	the	fifth	line,	however,	character	and	position	accord.	It	is
a	strong	line	in	a	strong	place,	in	the	sphere	of	heaven	(fifth	and	sixth	places);	moreover,	it	is	the	ruler	of
the	whole.	Therefore	 it	 represents	 the	great	man	whom	 it	 is	worthwhile	 to	 see.	Hence	 the	 two	central
lines	carry	no	warning	at	all;	they	are	altogether	favorable.

It	is	different	in	the	case	of	the	two	end	lines,	the	third	and	the	top	line.	Of	the	two,	the	third	has	the
more	 favorable	 position.	 It	 is	 indeed	 too	 strong	 for	 the	 place	 of	 transition	 (strength	 of	 character
intensified	by	strength	of	place),	so	that	it	would	seem	that	mistakes	are	to	be	feared.	However,	since	the
whole	 hexagram	 deals	 with	 creative	 powers,	 excess	 of	 strength	 does	 no	 harm,	 for	 at	 the	 place	 of
transition	it	can	be	applied	to	inner	preparation	for	the	new	conditions.	For	the	top	line,	however,	matters
are	quite	different.	Here	the	end	of	the	whole	situation	is	reached.	Although	the	place	is	weak,	the	line
character	is	still	strong.	This	divergence	between	what	one	wants	to	do	and	what	one	is	able	to	do	leads
to	remorse,	since	there	is	no	possible	way	out.



2.	K’un	/	The	Receptive

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	second	place.	K’un,	THE	RECEPTIVE,	represents	the	nature
of	 the	 earth;	 the	 number	 two	 symbolizes	 the	 earth.	 Furthermore,	 THE	 RECEPTIVE	 demonstrates	 the
nature	of	the	man	who	serves,	and	the	second	place	is	his	station.	In	addition,	this	line	expresses	perfectly
the	fourfold	character	of	the	Receptive:	it	 is	yielding,	devoted,	moderate	(i.e.,	central),	and	correct	(i.e.,
yielding	in	a	yielding	place).	For	this	reason,	it	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.	The	statements	made	in	the
Judgment	all	refer	to	the	nature	of	an	official:	“If	he	tries	to	lead,	he	goes	astray;	but	if	he	follows,	he	finds
guidance.	It	is	favorable	to	find	friends	in	the	west	and	south,	to	forego	friends	in	the	east	and	north.”

This	hexagram	is	linked	with	the	tenth	month	(November–December),	when	the	dark	power	in	nature
brings	an	end	to	the	year.

Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	RECEPTIVE	is	yielding.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	RECEPTIVE	brings	about	sublime	success,
Furthering	through	the	perseverance	of	a	mare.
If	the	superior	man	undertakes	something	and	tries	to	lead,
He	goes	astray;
But	if	he	follows,	he	finds	guidance.
It	is	favorable	to	find	friends	in	the	west	and	south,
To	forego	friends	in	the	east	and	north.
Quiet	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
Perfect	indeed	is	the	sublimity	of	the	Receptive.	All	beings	owe	their	birth	to	it,	because	it	receives

the	heavenly	with	devotion.
This	 is	 the	 explanation	 of	 the	 word	 “sublime”	 in	 the	 Judgment.	 The	 greatness	 of	 the	 Receptive	 is

characterized	 as	 perfect.	 That	 which	 attains	 the	 ideal	 is	 perfect.	 This	 means	 that	 the	 Receptive	 is
dependent	on	the	Creative.	While	the	Creative	is	the	generating	principle,	to	which	all	beings	owe	their
beginning,	because	the	soul	comes	from	it,	the	Receptive	is	that	which	brings	to	birth,	that	which	takes
the	seed	of	the	heavenly	into	itself	and	gives	to	beings	their	bodily	form.

The	 Receptive	 in	 its	 riches	 carries	 all	 things.	 Its	 nature	 is	 in	 harmony	 with	 the	 boundless.	 It
embraces	everything	in	its	breadth	and	illumines	everything	in	its	greatness.	Through	it,	all	individual
beings	attain	success.

This	 is	 the	 explanation	 of	 the	 word	 “success”	 in	 the	 Judgment.	 Here	 also	 there	 is	 the	 contrasting
complement	 to	 the	 Creative.	 While	 the	 Creative	 shields	 things—that	 is,	 covers	 them	 from	 above—the
Receptive	 carries	 them,	 like	 a	 foundation	 that	 endures	 forever.	 Infinite	 accord	 with	 the	 Creative	 is	 its
essence.	This	produces	its	success.	The	movement	of	the	Creative	is	a	direct	forward	movement,	and	its
resting	state	is	standstill;	the	movement	of	the	Receptive	is	an	opening	out,	and	in	its	resting	state	it	 is
closed.	 In	 the	 resting,	 closed	 state,	 it	 embraces	 all	 things	 as	 though	 in	 a	 vast	 womb.	 In	 the	 state	 of
movement,	of	opening,	it	allows	the	divine	light	to	enter,	and	by	means	of	this	light	illuminates	everything.
This	is	the	source	of	its	success,	which	shows	itself	in	the	success	of	living	beings.	While	the	success	of
the	 Creative	 lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 individual	 beings	 receive	 their	 specific	 forms,	 the	 success	 of	 the
Receptive	causes	them	to	thrive	and	unfold.

A	 mare	 belongs	 to	 the	 creatures	 of	 the	 earth;	 she	 roams	 the	 earth	 without	 bound.	 Yielding,
devoted,	furthering	through	perseverance:	thus	the	superior	man	has	a	direction	for	his	way	of	life.

While	the	Creative	is	symbolized	by	the	dragon	flying	in	the	heavens,	the	Receptive	is	symbolized	by
the	mare	(combining	strength	and	devotion)	coursing	over	the	earth.	Being	yielding	and	devoted	must	not
exclude	strength,	for	strength	is	necessary	to	the	Receptive	if	it	is	to	be	the	helper	of	the	Creative.	This
strength	is	expressed	in	the	words,	“furthering	through	perseverance,”	appearing	in	the	commentary	as
the	model	for	the	way	of	life	of	the	superior	man.	(The	punctuation	of	the	commentary	deviates	from	that
of	 the	 Judgment.	 Because	 of	 the	 rhyme,	 the	 commentary	 requires	 the	 literal	 translation,	 “Furthering
through	perseverance.	Thus	the	superior	man	has	somewhere	to	go.”	In	the	Judgment,	on	the	other	hand,
most	 interpreters	 make	 the	 last	 words	 a	 dependent	 clause	 linked	 with	 what	 follows,	 and	 the	 sentence
reads:	“If	the	superior	man	undertakes	something	…	he	goes	astray.”1)

Taking	the	 lead	brings	confusion	because	one	 loses	his	way.	Following	with	devotion—thus	does
one	attain	his	permanent	place.

In	the	west	and	south	one	finds	friends,	so	that	he	proceeds	with	people	of	his	own	kind.	In	the
east	and	north	one	must	do	without	friends,	so	that	he	finally	attains	good	fortune.

If	the	Receptive	were	to	push	ahead	on	its	own	initiative,	 it	would	deviate	from	its	natural	character
and	miss	the	way.	By	submitting	to	and	following	the	Creative,	it	attains	its	appropriate	permanent	place.

The	 west	 and	 south,	 according	 to	 King	 Wên’s	 arrangement,	 are	 the	 region	 in	 which	 the	 feminine
trigrams	are	placed.	Here	K’un	is	in	the	midst	of	the	daughters.	But	the	masculine	trigrams	(Ch’ien	and
the	sons)	are	in	the	east	and	north,	so	that	the	Receptive	in	this	region	is	alone.	But	the	very	fact	that	it	is



alone	with	the	Creative	is	to	its	advantage.	Thus	the	earth	must	be	alone	with	heaven,	the	official	must
serve	only	the	ruler,	the	wife	must	cleave	only	to	the	husband.

The	good	 fortune	of	 rest	 and	perseverance	depends	on	our	being	 in	 accord	with	 the	boundless
nature	of	the	earth.

The	earth	is	still.	It	does	not	act	of	itself	but	is	constantly	receptive	to	the	influences	of	heaven.	Thus	its
life	becomes	inexhaustible	and	eternal.	Man	likewise	attains	eternity	if	he	does	not	strive	vaingloriously	to
achieve	everything	of	his	own	strength	but	quietly	keeps	himself	receptive	to	the	impulses	flowing	to	him
from	the	creative	forces.

THE	IMAGE
The	earth’s	condition	is	receptive	devotion.
Thus	the	superior	man	who	has	breadth	of	character
Carries	the	outer	world.

Heaven	moves	with	power;	 therefore	 it	 is	 said	 of	 it	 that	 “it	moves.”	The	earth	 completes	within	 the
form;	hence,	 in	reference	to	 it,	one	says	“condition.”	Earth	 is	doubled,	 indicating	massiveness,	which	 is
necessary	 in	 order	 that	 it	may	dedicate	 itself	without	 forfeiting	 its	 nature.	Thus	man	 too	must	possess
inner	 strength,	 weight	 of	 character,	 and	 breadth	 of	 view,	 that	 he	 may	 endure	 the	 world	 without	 being
swayed	by	it.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	When	there	is	hoarfrost	underfoot,	solid	ice	is	not	far	off.
b)	 “When	 there	 is	 hoarfrost	underfoot,	 solid	 ice	 is	 not	 far	 off.”	When	 the	dark	power	begins	 to

grow	rigid	and	continues	in	this	way,	things	reach	the	point	of	solid	ice.2
The	 first	 line	 contains	 a	 warning	 not	 to	 minimize	 the	 beginnings	 of	 evil,	 because,	 left	 to	 itself,	 evil

increases	as	inevitably	as	the	ice	of	winter	follows	on	the	hoarfrost	of	autumn.
Six	in	the	second	place:

	
a)	Straight,	square,	great.	Without	purpose,	yet	nothing	remains	unfurthered
b)	The	movement	of	the	six	in	the	second	place3	is	straight	and,	because	of	this,	square.
“Without	purpose,	yet	nothing	remains	unfurthered”:	for	in	the	nature	of	the	earth	lies	the	light.

Because	 the	Receptive	 in	 its	movements	 adapts	 itself	 to	 the	Creative,	 these	movements	 come	 to	 be
exactly	as	they	should	be.	Thus	the	earth	brings	forth	all	beings,	each	in	 its	own	kind,	according	to	the
will	of	 the	Creator.	Square,	 firm,	refers	to	unchangingness.	Each	kind	of	 living	being	has	a	 fixed	 law	of
existence,	according	 to	which	 it	develops	 in	a	way	 that	 is	unchanging.	 In	 this	 lies	 the	greatness	of	 the
earth.

For	 this	very	 reason	 the	earth	has	no	need	of	a	purpose.	Everything	becomes	spontaneously	what	 it
should	rightly	be,	for	in	the	law	of	heaven	life	has	an	inner	light	that	it	must	involuntarily	obey.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Hidden	lines.	One	is	able	to	remain	persevering.
If	by	chance	you	are	in	the	service	of	a	king,
Seek	not	works,	but	bring	to	completion.
b)	“Hidden	lines.	One	is	able	to	remain	persevering.”	One	must	let	them	shine	forth	at	the	right

time.
“If	by	chance	you	are	in	the	service	of	a	king….“4	This	shows	that	the	light	of	wisdom	is	great.

To	hide	beauty	does	not	mean	to	be	inactive;	 it	means	only	that	beauty	must	not	be	displayed	at	the
wrong	time.	When	the	right	time	arrives,	one	must	reveal	oneself.	If	one	does	not	boast	of	one’s	merits,
but	sees	to	it	that	everything	is	carried	out,	it	is	a	sign	of	great	wisdom.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	A	tied-up	sack.	No	blame,	no	praise.
b)	“A	tied-up	sack.	No	blame.”	Through	caution	one	remains	free	of	harm.

Here	 there	 is	 a	 yin	 line	 in	 a	 yin	 place;	 that	 is,	 the	 yin	 power	 is	 on	 the	 increase,	 therefore	 the
contraction	is	as	powerful	as	in	the	case	of	a	tied-up	sack.	This	naturally	brings	about	a	certain	isolation,
but	it	frees	one	of	obligations.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	A	yellow	lower	garment	brings	supreme	good	fortune.
b)	“A	yellow	lower	garment	brings	supreme	good	fortune.”	Beauty	is	within.

This	line	resembles	in	position	the	six	in	the	third	place.	Here	also	the	strength	inherent	in	the	place	is
neutralized	by	the	character	of	the	line—hence,	in	both	cases,	hidden	beauty.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Dragons	fight	in	the	meadow.
Their	blood	is	black	and	yellow.
b)	“Dragons	fight	in	the	meadow.”	The	way	comes	to	an	end.

The	six	at	 the	 top	 tries	 to	hold	 firm,	although	 the	situation	of	darkness	 is	already	at	an	end.	At	 this
moment	 the	dark	principle	advances	out	of	 the	 realm	of	 the	morally	 indifferent	and	becomes	positively
evil.	 There	 ensues	 a	 battle	 with	 the	 light-giving	 primal	 power	 coming	 from	 without	 to	 oppose	 the
darkness,	in	which	both	elements	suffer	harm.



When	all	the	lines	are	sixes:
	

a)	Lasting	perseverance	furthers.
b)	“Lasting	perseverance”:	it	ends	in	great	things.

The	sixes	change	into	their	opposites;	they	become	light	or	great	lines.
Commentary	on	the	Words	of	the	Text

In	contrast	to	the	considerable	number	of	commentaries	on	THE	CREATIVE	comprised	in	the	Wên	Yen,
there	is	only	one	on	THE	RECEPTIVE.

On	the	Hexagram	as	a	Whole
The	 Receptive	 is	 altogether	 yielding,	 yet	 firm	 in	 its	 movement.	 It	 is	 altogether	 still,	 yet	 in	 its

nature	square.
The	mare	is	yielding,	yet	strong.	So	likewise	is	the	Receptive,	for	only	in	this	way	can	it	be	the	peer	of

the	Creative.	It	is	altogether	still	within,	because	wholly	dependent,	yet	it	is	bound	immutably	to	definite
laws	 in	 its	 manifestations—the	 bringing	 to	 birth	 of	 the	 different	 species.	 “Firm	 in	 movement”	 is	 the
explanation	of	 the	text	words	“sublime	success.”	“Still,	yet	square”	 is	 the	explanation	of	 the	text	words
“perseverance	furthers.”

“If	he	follows,	he	finds	guidance,”	and	thus	obtains	something	enduring.
“It	embraces	everything,”	and	its	power	to	transform	is	light-giving.

These	sentences	are	amplifications	of	 the	Commentary	on	the	Decision.	The	reference	here	 is	 to	 the
movement	of	the	Receptive,	which	corresponds	with	the	seasons	of	summer	and	autumn	(south	and	west).
At	these	times	the	Receptive	is	with	“friends,”	that	is,	obedient	to	the	laws	of	heaven:	it	is	giving	life	to	all
varieties	of	beings,	each	according	to	its	kind—so	sharing	the	eternity	of	heaven,	embracing	all	things	and
bringing	them	to	maturity,	and	thus	in	bright	light	showing	its	power	to	transform	them.

The	way	of	the	Receptive—how	devoted	it	is!	It	receives	heaven	into	itself	and	acts	in	its	own	time.
These	 two	 activities	 correspond	 with	 winter	 and	 spring	 (north	 and	 east).	 The	 reference	 is	 to	 the

solitary	union	with	the	Creative,	the	receiving	of	the	seed,	and	its	quiet	ripening	to	birth.
The	comments	on	THE	RECEPTIVE	are	based	on	the	character	of	the	six	in	the	second	place,	the	ruler

of	the	hexagram,	just	as	the	comments	on	THE	CREATIVE	are	based	on	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	in	that
hexagram.

On	the	Lines
On	six	at	the	beginning:

A	house	that	heaps	good	upon	good	is	sure	to	have	an	abundance	of	blessings.	A	house	that	heaps
evil	upon	evil	is	sure	to	have	an	abundance	of	ills.	Where	a	servant	murders	his	master,	where	a	son
murders	his	father,	the	causes	do	not	lie	between	the	morning	and	evening	of	one	day.	It	took	a	long
time	 for	 things	 to	go	 so	 far.	 It	 came	about	because	 things	 that	 should	have	been	stopped	were	not
stopped	soon	enough.

In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“When	there	is	hoarfrost	underfoot,	solid	ice	is	not	far	off.”	This
shows	how	far	things	go	when	they	are	allowed	to	run	on.

According	to	Chu	Hsi	the	last	sentence	should	read:	“This	refers	to	the	necessary	vigilance,”	i.e.,	the
vigilance	needed	to	stop	in	time	those	things	which	must	naturally	have	evil	consequences.

On	six	in	the	second	place:
Straightness	 means	 righting	 things;	 squareness	 means	 fulfillment	 of	 duty.	 The	 superior	 man	 is

serious,	 in	 order	 to	 make	 his	 inner	 life	 straight;	 he	 does	 his	 duty,	 in	 order	 to	 make	 his	 outer	 life
square.	Where	seriousness	and	fulfillment	of	duty	stand	firm,	character	will	not	become	one-sided.

“Straight,	square,	great.	Without	purpose,	yet	nothing	remains	unfurthered”:	because	one	is	never
in	doubt	as	to	what	one	has	to	do.

The	 inner	 life	becomes	right	 through	consistent	seriousness;	 the	outer	 life	becomes	correct	 (square)
through	 fulfillment	of	duty.	Duty	has	a	shaping	 influence	on	outer	 life,	yet	 it	 is	by	no	means	something
external.	Through	seriousness	and	fulfillment	of	duty,	character	develops	richly	of	itself;	greatness	comes
unsought,	of	its	own	accord.	Therefore	in	all	matters	the	individual	hits	upon	the	right	course	instinctively
and	without	reflection,	because	he	is	free	of	all	those	scruples	and	doubts	which	induce	a	timid	vacillation
and	lame	the	power	of	decision.

On	six	in	the	third	place:
The	dark	 force	possesses	beauty	but	 veils	 it.	So	must	a	man	be	when	entering	 the	 service	of	a

king.	He	must	avoid	laying	claim	to	the	completed	work.	This	is	the	way	of	the	earth,	the	way	of	the
wife,	the	way	of	one	who	serves.	It	is	the	way	of	the	earth	to	make	no	display	of	completed	work	but
rather	to	bring	everything	to	completion	vicariously.

It	 is	 the	 duty	 of	 one	 who	 subordinates	 himself	 to	 conceal	 his	 own	 worth,	 without	 craving	 an
independent	position,	and	to	 let	all	 the	merits	 for	 the	completed	work	go	to	the	master	 for	whom	he	 is
working.

On	six	in	the	fourth	place:
When	heaven	and	earth	are	creating	in	change	and	transformation,	all	plants	and	trees	flourish;

but	when	heaven	and	earth	close,	the	able	man	withdraws	into	the	dark.
In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	“A	tied-up	sack.	No	blame,	no	praise.”	This	counsels	caution.

The	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	near	the	ruler	but	does	not	receive	recognition	from	him.	In	such	a	case,
the	 only	 right	 thing	 to	 do	 is	 to	 shut	 oneself	 off	 from	 the	 world.	 This	 is	 the	 resting	 state	 of	 the	 dark
principle,	the	state	in	which	it	closes	(cf.	above).

On	six	in	the	fifth	place:
The	 superior	 man	 is	 yellow	 and	 moderate;	 thus	 he	 makes	 his	 influence	 felt	 in	 the	 outer	 world

through	reason.



He	seeks	the	right	place	for	himself	and	dwells	in	the	essential.
His	beauty	is	within,	but	it	gives	freedom	to	his	limbs	and	expresses	itself	in	his	works.	This	is	the

perfection	of	beauty.
Yellow	is	the	color	of	the	middle	and	of	moderation.	Inner	moderation	has	an	outer	effect,	because	it

imbues	all	 forms	of	expression	with	reason.	The	right	place	sought	by	 the	superior	man	 is	 found	 in	 the
good	 form	 that	 makes	 him	 yield	 precedence	 to	 others	 and	 stay	 modestly	 in	 the	 background.	 Reserved
grace,	unseen	yet	present	in	all	movements	and	deeds,	is	the	perfection	of	beauty.

There	 is	 a	 characterizing	 difference	 in	 what	 is	 said	 about	 the	 lines	 of	 THE	 CREATIVE	 and	 THE
RECEPTIVE.	 In	 the	 former	 the	 emphasis	 is	 always	 on	 the	 real,	 the	 unfailing,	 while	 in	 the	 latter	 the
attributes	stressed	are	seriousness,	conscientiousness,	and	modesty.	We	are	dealing	with	the	same	thing
seen	from	two	sides.	Only	truth	leads	to	seriousness,	and	only	seriousness	makes	truth	possible.

On	six	at	the	top:
When	the	dark	seeks	to	equal	the	light	principle,	there	is	certain	to	be	a	struggle.	Lest	one	think

that	 nothing	 of	 the	 light	 remains,	 the	 dragon	 is	 mentioned.	 But	 to	 make	 clear	 that	 there	 is	 no
deviation	 from	 their	 kind,5	 blood	 is	 also	 mentioned.	 Black	 and	 yellow	 are	 heaven	 and	 earth	 in
confusion.	Heaven	is	black	and	earth	yellow.

This	explanation	is	somewhat	obscurely	expressed.	The	meaning	is	as	follows:	In	the	tenth	month,	the
power	of	the	dark	principle	has	completely	triumphed;	the	last	remaining	light	has	been	driven	away.6	The
sun	has	reached	its	lowest	position;	the	dark	force	rules	unrestrained.	But	this	is	the	very	reason	for	the
coming	change	to	the	opposite;	the	solstice	takes	place,	and	light	struggles	anew	with	darkness.

It	is	the	same	in	all	relationships.	The	dark	principle	cannot	be	the	ruling	one;	it	is	in	its	proper	place
only	when	 conditioned	by	 the	 light	 principle,	 and	 submissive	 to	 it.	 If	 this	 is	 disregarded,	 and	 the	 dark
principle	tries	to	issue	from	its	realm	within	and	come	forth	upon	the	field	of	action	without,	the	power	of
the	light	principle	shows	itself.	The	dragon,	the	symbol	of	the	light-giving	power,	appears	and	drives	the
dark	power	back	within	its	confines,	as	a	sign	that	the	light	principle	still	exists.	Blood	is	the	symbol	of	the
dark	principle,	just	as	breath	is	the	symbol	of	the	light	principle.	Since	blood	flows,	the	dark	principle	is
injured.	However,	blood	comes	not	only	from	the	dark	principle,	for	the	light	principle	also	suffers	injury
in	this	struggle;	therefore	the	color	is	designated	as	black	and	yellow.	Black,	or	rather	dark	blue,	 is	the
color	of	heaven,	and	yellow	 that	of	 the	earth.	 (It	 should	be	noted	 that	 the	color	symbolism	here	differs
from	that	in	the	comments	on	the	eight	trigrams,	where	the	Creative	is	said	to	be	red	and	the	Receptive
black,	i.e.,	dark.)

NOTE.	Here,	in	contrast	to	the	relationships	in	the	hexagram	of	THE	CREATIVE,	the	single	lines	do	not
have	 a	 developmental	 relation	 to	 one	 another,	 but	 stand	 side	 by	 side	 without	 interrelation.	 Each	 line
represents	a	separate	situation.	This	is	in	accord	with	the	nature	of	the	two	hexagrams.	THE	CREATIVE
represents	time,	producing	sequence;	THE	RECEPTIVE	represents	space,	which	indicates	juxtaposition.

With	respect	to	the	individual	lines,	the	following	is	to	be	noted.	The	first	and	the	top	line,	i.e.,	the	two
outside	places,	are	unfavorable.	The	inner,	not	the	outer	place,	is	proper	to	the	Receptive.	The	first	line
shows	 the	 dark	 principle	 taking	 the	 initiative	 (cf.	 hexagram	 44,	 Kou,	 COMING	 TO	 MEET);	 this	 means
danger.	Therefore	the	dark	principle	is	represented	as	something	objective	that	must	be	opposed	at	the
right	time.

In	the	top	place,	the	dark	principle	arrogates	leadership	to	itself	and	enters	into	rivalry	with	the	light
principle.	 Here	 also	 it	 is	 represented	 objectively	 as	 the	 thing	 fought	 against	 (cf.	 hexagram	 43,	 Kuai,
BREAK-THROUGH);	for	these	two	situations	are	not	 in	harmony	with	the	nature	of	a	superior	man,	and
the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 is	 written	 only	 for	 superior	 men.	 Hence	 whatever	 is	 inferior	 is	 in	 every	 case
something	external	or	objective.

The	middle	lines	of	the	primary	trigrams,	being	central,	are	favorable.	But	in	contrast	to	the	situation
in	Ch’ien,	the	ruler	here	is	in	the	second	place	instead	of	the	fifth,	for	it	is	the	nature	of	the	Receptive	to
be	 below.	 Therefore	 we	 are	 here	 shown	 the	 way	 of	 the	 earth,	 of	 material,	 spatial	 nature,	 in	 which
everything	acts	spontaneously.	The	fifth	place	shows	modesty	in	human	nature.	The	fact	that	garments	are
spoken	of	points	rather	to	the	image	of	a	princess	than	to	that	of	a	prince	(cf.	hexagram	54,	Kuei	Mei,	THE
MARRYING	MAIDEN,	six	in	the	fifth	place).

The	two	transitional	lines	are	neutral	in	meaning.	The	third	has	the	possibility	of	entering	the	service
of	a	king,	for	the	weakness	of	its	nature	is	compensated	by	the	strength	of	its	place.	But	while	the	third
line	of	Ch’ien	is	self-contained,	the	third	line	of	K’un	is	self-effacingly	concerned	only	with	serving	others.
The	fourth	line	is	too	weak	(a	yielding	line	in	a	weak	place),	and	moreover	has	no	relationship	with	the
fifth	 line.	 Hence	 withdrawal	 into	 itself	 is	 all	 that	 is	 left	 for	 it.	 The	 heightened	 passivity	 of	 this	 line
corresponds	with	the	heightened	activity	of	the	nine	in	the	third	place	in	Ch’ien,	just	as	the	third	line	in
K’un	corresponds	in	its	undetermined	possibilities	with	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	of	Ch’ien.



3.	Chun	/	Difficulty	at	the	Beginning

In	Chun	the	nine	at	the	beginning	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	are	the	rulers.	These	two	are	the	only
yang	lines	in	the	hexagram.	The	nine	at	the	beginning	is	below	and	means	the	helper	who	can	quiet	the
people.	The	nine	in	the	fifth	place	is	above;	it	can	appoint	the	helper	for	the	task	of	quieting	the	people.

The	Sequence	of	the	Hexagrams1
After	heaven	and	earth	have	come	into	existence,	individual	beings	develop.	It	is	these	individual

beings	 that	 fill	 the	 space	 between	 heaven	 and	 earth.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of
DIFFICULTY	AT	THE	BEGINNING.	Difficulty	at	the	beginning	is	the	same	as	filling	up.

Chun	does	not	really	mean	filling	up.	What	is	meant	is	the	difficulty	that	arises	when	heaven	and	earth,
the	 light	 and	 the	 shadowy	 principle,	 have	 united	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 and	 all	 beings	 are	 begotten	 and
brought	to	birth.	This	produces	a	chaos	that	fills	up	everything,	hence	the	idea	of	filling	up	is	associated
with	the	hexagram	Chun.

Miscellaneous	Notes
Chun	is	visible	but	has	not	yet	lost	its	dwelling.

The	grass	has	already	pushed	its	tips	out	of	the	earth,	that	is,	it	is	visible	but	still	within	the	earth,	its
original	dwelling	place.	The	upper	nuclear	trigram,	mountain,	indicates	visibility;	the	lower,	earth,	means
dwelling.

THE	JUDGMENT
Difficulty	at	the	Beginning	works	supreme	success,
Furthering	through	perseverance.
Nothing	should	be	undertaken.
It	furthers	one	to	appoint	helpers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
DIFFICULTY	AT	THE	BEGINNING:	the	firm	and	the	yielding	unite	for	the	first	time,	and	the	birth

is	difficult.
The	lower	primary	trigram	is	Chên,	the	eldest	son,	who	comes	into	being	when	the	light	power	and	the

dark	 power	 first	 draw	 together.	 This	 indicates	 the	 first	 union.	 K’an,	 the	 upper	 primary	 trigram,	 means
difficulty,	danger.	This	indicates	the	difficulty	of	the	birth.

Movement	in	the	midst	of	danger	brings	great	success	and	perseverance.
The	 lower	 trigram,	Chên,	 is	movement;	 the	upper,	K’an,	 is	danger.	Hence	we	have	movement	 in	 the

midst	of	danger.	By	movement	one	gets	out	of	the	danger.	This	explains	the	words	of	the	text:	“Supreme
success,	furthering	through	perseverance.”

The	 movement	 of	 thunder	 and	 rain	 fills	 the	 atmosphere.	 If	 chaos	 and	 darkness	 prevail	 while
heaven	is	creating,	it	is	fitting	to	appoint	helpers,	without	being	oneself	thereby	lulled	to	rest.

This	 too	 describes	 the	 filling	 up	 of	 the	 atmosphere	 with	 the	 difficulties	 that	 prevail	 up	 to	 the	 point
when	a	thunderstorm	breaks.	The	final	effect,	however,	is	presaged	in	the	fact	that	the	two	images	are	not
instanced	in	the	sequence	[predicated	by	the	structure	of	the	hexagram]	of	K’an	(clouds)	above	and	Chên
(thunder)	below;	instead,	thunder	is	mentioned	first	and	then	the	clouds,	dissolved,	are	spoken	of	as	rain.

Just	as	 in	a	storm,	 thunder	and	darkening	clouds	precede	release,	so	 in	 the	affairs	of	men	a	chaotic
time	precedes	a	period	of	order.	At	such	a	time	a	ruler	entrusted	with	bringing	order	out	of	chaos	needs
efficient	people.	At	first,	however,	the	situation	remains	serious	and	difficult,	and	he	must	not	try	to	rely
wholly	on	others.	This	saying	is	suggested	by	the	two	rulers	of	the	hexagram.	The	nine	at	the	beginning
indicates	the	efficient	helper	who	should	be	appointed	in	such	dangerous	times;	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place
means	 that	 there	 are	 still	 difficulties	 that	 preclude	 yielding	 to	 inaction.	 Because	 of	 the	 precarious
conditions,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	must	still	await	the	proper	solution	and	may	not	yet	rest.

THE	IMAGE
Clouds	and	thunder:
The	image	of	Difficulty	at	the	Beginning.
Thus	the	superior	man
Brings	order	out	of	confusion.

While	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision	the	sequence	is	that	of	thunder	and	rain,	to	indicate	the	end
condition	 brought	 about	 by	 the	 movement,	 here	 clouds	 and	 thunder	 are	 named	 in	 the	 sequence	 they
follow	 in	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 hexagram.	 This	 specifies	 the	 condition	 before	 the	 rain,	 which	 symbolizes
danger	(K’an).	To	overcome	it,	we	must	separate	and	combine,	as	happens	when	a	thunderstorm	breaks—
first	clouds	above	and	thunder	below,	then	thunder	above	and	rain	below.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Hesitation	and	hindrance.
It	furthers	one	to	remain	persevering.
It	furthers	one	to	appoint	helpers.
b)	Although	hesitation	and	hindrance	still	prevail,	the	aim	of	the	work	is	nonetheless	to	carry	out

what	 is	 right.	When	an	eminent	man	subordinates	himself	 to	his	 inferiors,	he	wins	 the	hearts	of	all



people.
This	line	is	a	ruler	of	the	hexagram.	It	stands	at	the	beginning,	which	indicates	that	the	difficulties	at

the	 beginning	 remain	 unsolved.	 Here	 nothing	 can	 be	 accomplished	 suddenly;	 the	 confusion	 must	 be
resolved	gradually.	The	character	and	position	of	the	line	show	the	right	way	to	this	goal.	It	is	by	nature	a
light,	 firm	 line,	 hence	 eminent,	 and	 as	 such	 places	 itself	 below	 the	 weak	 yin	 lines,	 which	 cannot	 help
themselves.	 To	 rule	by	 serving	 is	 the	 secret	 of	 success.	 Thus	 this	 line	 is	 the	 efficient	 helper	needed	 to
overcome	obstacles	in	times	of	difficulty	at	the	beginning.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Difficulties	pile	up.
Horse	and	wagon	part.
He	is	not	a	robber;
He	wants	to	woo	when	the	time	comes.
The	maiden	is	chaste,
She	does	not	pledge	herself.
Ten	years—then	she	pledges	herself.
b)	The	difficulty	of	the	six	 in	the	second	place	 is	that	 it	rests	upon	a	rigid	 line.	Pledging	herself

after	ten	years	means	return	to	the	general	rule.
This	line	stands	in	the	midst	of	the	difficulties	at	the	beginning.	Its	normal	connection	is	with	the	nine

in	the	fifth	place,	with	which	it	has	a	relationship	of	correspondence.	But	this	relationship	is	disturbed	by
the	 influence	 of	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning,	 which	 stands	 below	 and	 through	 its	 importunities	 (it	 is
moreover	one	of	the	rulers	of	the	hexagram)	causes	doubt	and	uncertainty.	But	since	the	six	in	the	second
place	is	central	and	correct,	these	temptations	are	overcome,	and	when	the	time	of	difficulty	is	at	an	end
(“ten	years”	indicates	a	complete	cycle)	the	general	rule	obtains	again,	and	the	connection	with	the	nine
in	the	fifth	place	is	established.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Whoever	hunts	deer	without	the	forester
Only	loses	his	way	in	the	forest.
The	superior	man	understands	the	signs	of	the	time
And	prefers	to	desist.
To	go	on	brings	humiliation.
b)	“He	hunts	deer	without	the	forester,”	that	is,	he	desires	the	game.
“The	 superior	 man	 understands	 the	 signs	 of	 the	 time	 and	 prefers	 to	 desist.	 To	 go	 on	 brings

humiliation.”
It	leads	to	failure.

The	line	is	weak	in	character	but	occupies	a	strong	place,	being	moreover	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	of
movement.	Out	of	this	arises	the	danger	that	its	movement	will	be	uncontrolled	and	disturbed	by	desire.
Such	movement	must	lead	to	failure.

In	terms	of	the	nuclear	trigrams,	the	line	belongs	in	one	aspect	to	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	K’un,	and
in	this	position	it	has	abandoned	the	ruler	and	leader	and	retains	only	movement.	Here	the	saying	in	the
hexagram	 K’un	 applies:	 “If	 one	 tries	 to	 lead,	 one	 goes	 astray.”	 The	 forest	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 upper
nuclear	 trigram	Kên,	mountain,	whose	 realm	 is	 entered	here.	Since	 the	 six	 in	 the	 third	place	does	not
have	a	corresponding	line	above,	in	the	sixth	place,	it	fails	and	does	not	find	the	game	it	is	seeking.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Horse	and	wagon	part.
Strive	for	union.
To	go	brings	good	fortune.
Everything	acts	to	further.
b)	To	go	only	when	bidden—this	is	clarity.

This	line	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	nine	at	the	beginning,	and	from	this	arises	the
idea	 of	 waiting	 until	 courted.	 The	 courting	 is	 expressed	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning
subordinates	 itself	 to	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fourth	 place.	 This	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning	 is	 the	 active	 ruler	 of	 the
hexagram;	in	contradistinction	to	this,	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	stands	for	an	able	man	wise	enough	not
to	offer	his	services	and	to	wait	until	bidden.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Difficulties	in	blessing.
A	little	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Great	perseverance	brings	misfortune.
b)	“Difficulties	in	blessing,”	because	the	benefaction	is	not	yet	recognized.

This	line	is	one	of	the	rulers	of	the	hexagram,	and	being	central	and	correct,	it	is	capable	of	having	a
beneficial	 influence.	 However,	 this	 influence	 is	 impaired	 in	 several	 ways.	 First,	 the	 line	 stands	 in	 the
middle	 of	 the	 trigram	 K’an,	 gorge,	 and	 as	 the	 image	 implies,	 is	 shut	 off	 at	 both	 sides	 by	 steep	 walls.
Hence,	 as	 in	 the	 case	 of	 a	 river	 between	 steep	 banks,	 its	 influence	 cannot	 benefit	 the	 surroundings.
Furthermore,	the	six	in	the	second	place,	although	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	it	is	too	weak,
while	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning,	 the	 other	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 is	 not	 in	 direct	 relationship	 to	 it.
Therefore,	from	the	individual	standpoint	of	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	the	ruler	below	is	to	be	regarded



rather	as	a	rival.	Finally,	the	line	is	at	the	top	of	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	whose	attribute	is	keeping
still,	and	which	thus	also	obstructs	its	influence.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Horse	and	wagon	part.
Bloody	tears	flow.
b)	“Bloody	tears	flow.”	How	could	one	tarry	long	in	this!

Like	the	second	and	fourth	lines,	this	 line	is	symbolized	by	a	wagon	that	stops	and	is	unhitched.	But
while	the	second	line	is	related	to	both	the	first	and	the	fifth	line,	and	hence	needs	only	to	avoid	a	false
tie,	and	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	corresponds	with	the	nine	at	the	beginning	and	finds	in	it	a	suitable	tie,
the	six	at	the	top	is	entirely	isolated,	because	there	is	no	corresponding	line	in	the	third	place.	At	the	top
of	the	trigram	K’an,	whose	symbol	is	a	defective	wagon,	it	[the	line	as	the	traveler]	is	forced	to	unhitch.
But	no	one	comes	to	the	rescue,	and	therefore	the	other	symbols	of	the	trigram	K’an—water	(tears)	and
blood—manifest	themselves.	However,	the	state	of	despair	is	not	a	lasting	one.	Indeed,	since	this	top	line
is	 a	 six,	 it	 changes	 into	 its	 opposite,	 and	 out	 of	 the	 trigram	 for	 danger	 and	 gorge	 there	 develops	 the
trigram	Sun,	which	means	wind,	and	which	therefore	overcomes	the	standstill.	In	this	situation,	therefore,
one	must	quickly	introduce	a	change.



4.	Mêng	/	Youthful	Folly

The	nine	in	the	second	place	and	the	six	in	the	fifth	are	the	rulers.	The	nine	in	the	second	place	has	a
firm	and	central	character,	and	the	six	in	the	fifth	corresponds	with	it.	The	nine	in	the	second	place	is	in	a
low	position;	it	is	the	teacher,	capable	of	teaching	others.	The	six	in	the	fifth	place	is	in	a	high	position;	it
is	able	to	honor	the	teacher	and	thus	to	teach	men	through	him.

The	Sequence
When,	after	difficulties	at	the	beginning,	things	have	just	been	born,	they	are	always	wrapped	at

birth	in	obtuseness.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	YOUTHFUL	FOLLY.	For	youthful	folly	means
youthful	obtuseness.	This	is	the	state	of	things	in	their	youth.

Miscellaneous	Notes
YOUTHFUL	FOLLY	means	confusion	and	subsequent	enlightenment.

In	early	life	the	various	qualities	and	aptitudes	are	as	yet	undifferentiated	and	undeveloped.	Through
education	everything	is	differentiated,	and	clarity	takes	the	place	of	obtuseness.	Obtuseness	is	symbolized
by	the	inner	trigram,	abyss,	and	clarity	by	the	outer	trigram,	mountain.

THE	JUDGMENT
YOUTHFUL	FOLLY	has	success.
It	is	not	I	who	seek	the	young	fool;
The	young	fool	seeks	me.
At	the	first	oracle	I	inform	him.
If	he	asks	two	or	three	times,	it	is	importunity.
If	he	importunes,	I	give	him	no	information.
Perseverance	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
YOUTHFUL	FOLLY	shows	danger	at	the	foot	of	a	mountain.	Danger	and	standstill:	this	is	folly.

The	image	of	the	hexagram,	a	mountain	with	a	watery	abyss	in	front	of	it,	as	well	as	the	attributes	of
the	two	primary	trigrams,	indicating	a	danger	before	which	one	pauses,	suggests	the	idea	of	folly.

“FOLLY	has	success.”	One	who	succeeds	hits	upon	the	right	time	for	his	undertaking.
“It	is	not	I	who	seek	the	young	fool;	the	young	fool	seeks	me.”	The	two	positions	correspond.
“At	the	first	oracle	I	answer,”	because	the	position	is	firm	and	central.
“If	 someone	 asks	 two	 or	 three	 times,	 it	 is	 importunity.	 If	 he	 importunes,	 I	 give	 no	 answer.”	 To

importune	is	folly.
To	strengthen	what	is	right	in	a	fool	is	a	holy	task.

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	strong	second	line.	It	is	in	the	middle	of	the	lower	trigram,	therefore
in	a	central	position.	Since	the	line	is	strong	and	central,	it	meets	with	success	by	acting	at	the	right	time.
It	represents	a	sage	in	a	lowly	position,	qualified	to	counsel	wisely	a	youthful	and	inexperienced	ruler.	The
youthful	ruler	is	represented	by	the	weak	fifth	line,	which	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to
the	 strong	 second	 line.	The	 fifth	 line,	which	 is	weak	 in	 a	 superior	place,	 and	 the	 second	 line,	which	 is
strong	in	an	inferior	place,	together	express	the	fact	that	the	strong	teacher	does	not	seek	out	the	young
fool;	 rather,	 the	 latter	approaches	 the	 teacher	as	one	asking	a	 favor.	This	 is	 the	correct	 relationship	 in
education.
Because	the	second	line	is	strong	and	central,	it	can	answer	the	questions	of	the	fifth,	keeping	within

definite	 bounds	 of	 moderation.	 But	 if	 these	 bounds	 are	 overstepped	 with	 importunate	 questions,	 the
teacher	in	turn	becomes	disagreeable	toward	the	pupil	by	refusing	to	answer.
The	saying	in	the	text,	“Perseverance	furthers,”	is	amplified	by	the	final	comment,	“To	strengthen	what

is	right	in	a	fool	is	a	holy	task.”
In	addition	to	the	second	line,	the	strong	line	at	the	top	is	also	occupied	with	driving	out	youthful	folly,

while	 the	 remaining	 four	 lines	 represent	 youthful	 fools	 of	 various	kinds.	The	 second	 line,	which	 is	 in	 a
central	position,	represents	gentleness,	while	the	strong	top	line	stands	for	severity.

THE	IMAGE
A	spring	wells	up	at	the	foot	of	the	mountain:
The	image	Of	YOUTH.
Thus	the	superior	man	fosters	his	character
By	thoroughness	in	all	that	he	does.

The	 spring	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	mountain	 is	 still	 small	 and	 in	 its	 youth.	 The	 superior	man	 derives	 his
course	of	action	from	the	images	of	the	two	trigrams.	In	his	nature	he	is	thoroughgoing,	and	clear	as	a
mountain	spring.	Hence	he	achieves	a	calmness	in	the	face	of	danger	that	emulates	the	great	calmness	of
a	mountain	on	the	edge	of	an	abyss.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	To	make	a	fool	develop
It	furthers	one	to	apply	discipline.
The	fetters	should	be	removed.



To	go	on	in	this	way	brings	humiliation.
b)	“It	furthers	one	to	apply	discipline”—that	is,	in	order	to	give	emphasis	to	the	law.

The	yielding	line	in	the	lower	position	is	a	youthful	fool	who	as	yet	is	following	no	settled	course.	He
must	be	subjected	to	discipline	by	the	strong	line	standing	above	him	in	the	second	place,	in	order	that
firm	principles	and	good	habits	may	be	formed	in	him.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	To	bear	with	fools	in	kindliness	brings	good	fortune.
To	know	how	to	take	women
Brings	good	fortune.
The	son	is	capable	of	taking	charge	of	the	household.
b)	“The	son	is	capable	of	taking	charge	of	the	household,”	for	firm	and	yielding	are	in	union.

The	yielding	 fifth	 line	stands	 in	a	complementary	 relationship	 to	 the	 firm	second	 line.	Therefore	 the
compliant	master	of	the	household	permits	the	firm	son	to	take	over.	The	same	holds	true	in	public	life	as
regards	the	relationship	between	prince	and	official.	This	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Take	not	a	maiden	who,	when	she	sees	a	man	of	bronze,
Loses	possession	of	herself.
Nothing	furthers.
b)	One	should	not	take	the	maiden	because	her	conduct	is	not	in	accord	with	order.

The	line	is	yielding	in	a	strong	place;	besides,	it	is	in	the	place	of	transition	from	the	lower	to	the	upper
trigram.	Hence	it	is	not	able	to	withstand	the	temptation	to	throw	itself	away,	and	thus	it	leaves	the	right
path.	An	intimate	union	is	therefore	not	favorable.	The	emendation	of	the	text	proposed	by	Chu	Hsi,	who
wished	to	read	“in	accord	with	order”	as	“cautious,”	is	superfluous.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Entangled	youthful	folly	brings	humiliation.
b)	The	humiliation	of	entangled	youthful	folly	comes	from	the	fact	that	it	of	all	things	is	furthest

from	what	is	real.
A	yielding	line	in	a	weak	place,	unrelated	to	a	firm	line	and	surrounded	by	other	weak	lines,	is	through

these	circumstances	completely	excluded	from	any	relationship	with	a	real,	 i.e.,	firm	line,	and	therefore
remains	incurably	entangled	in	its	youthful	folly.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Childlike	folly	brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	childlike	fool	comes	from	his	being	devoted	and	gentle.

The	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	ruler,	but	since	the	line	is	yielding	and	in	relationship	with	the	firm	line	in
the	second	place,	we	have	the	idea	of	devotion,	that	is,	courtesy	of	speech,	and	of	gentleness,	readiness	to
listen.	The	line	stands	at	the	top	of	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	K’un,	which	is	by	nature	devoted.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	In	punishing	folly
It	does	not	further	one
To	commit	transgressions.
The	only	thing	that	furthers
Is	to	prevent	transgressions.
b)	“It	furthers	to	prevent	transgressions,”	for	then	those	above	and	those	below	conform	to	order.

This	strong	line	is	in	relationship	with	the	weak	third	line,	which	has	deviated	from	order	and	pushed
ahead	regardless	of	circumstances.	It	is	vigorously	sent	back	where	it	belongs	by	the	top	line,	so	that	it
conforms	to	order.	But	since	the	top	line	acts	only	defensively	and	does	not	exceed	its	limits,	it	does	not
itself	deviate	from	order.



5.	Hsü	/	Waiting	(Nourishment)

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	All	transactions	require	patient	waiting,	and	it
is	 particularly	 essential	 for	 a	 ruler	 that	 his	 plans	 should	 be	 brought	 to	 fruition	 through	 continuous
influence.	The	remark	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision—”Occupies	the	place	of	heaven	and	is	central
and	correct	in	its	behavior”—refers	to	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.

The	Sequence
When	things	are	still	 small,	one	must	not	 leave	 them	without	nourishment.	Hence	there	 follows

the	hexagram	Hsü.	Hsü	means	the	way	to	eating	and	drinking.
The	connection	between	the	two	meanings	of	the	hexagram—nourishment	and	waiting—lies	in	the	fact

that	we	must	wait	to	be	nourished.	Nourishment	depends	on	heaven	and	the	rain.	It	does	not	lie	within
the	power	of	man.

Miscellaneous	Notes
WAITING	means	not	advancing.

THE	JUDGMENT
WAITING.	If	you	are	sincere,
You	have	light	and	success.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
WAITING	means	holding	back.	Danger	lies	ahead.	Being	firm	and	strong,	one	does	not	fall	into	it.

The	meaning	is	that	one	does	not	become	perplexed	or	bewildered.
The	lower	trigram	is	Ch’ien,	whose	attribute	is	strength.	The	upper	trigram	is	K’an,	the	abyss,	danger;

but	since	we	feel	secure	in	our	own	strength	and	do	not	act	overhastily,	we	avoid	perplexity.
“If	you	are	sincere,	you	have	light	and	success.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.”	For	the	ruling

line	occupies	the	place	of	heaven	and	is	central	and	correct	in	its	behavior.
“It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.”	Through	progress	the	work	is	accomplished.

The	fifth	line,	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	has	the	sincerity	of	water,	of	which	it	is	the	symbol	(K’an	is	a
watercourse	 between	 high	 banks).	 This	 line	 corresponds	 in	 its	 special	 quality	with	 the	meaning	 of	 the
trigram	Ch’ien,	the	Creative,	heaven.	In	that	it	is	a	firm	line	in	an	uneven	(i.e.,	yang)	place,	its	place	and
character	correspond,	hence	it	is	correct.	Moreover,	it	is	in	the	middle	of	the	upper	primary	trigram	and
therefore	central.	All	of	these	are	relationships	of	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	that	point	to	success.	Waiting
does	 not	mean	 giving	 up	 an	 undertaking,	 however.	 To	 defer	 is	 not	 to	 abandon.	 Therefore	 the	 work	 is
accomplished.

THE	IMAGE
Clouds	rise	up	to	heaven:
The	image	of	WAITING.
Thus	the	superior	man	eats	and	drinks,
Is	joyous	and	of	good	cheer.

In	 the	heavens,	water	 takes	 the	 form	of	clouds.	Once	 the	clouds	 rise,	 it	will	not	be	 long	before	 rain
falls.	While	 frequently	 the	 second	portion	of	 the	 Image	separates	 the	attributes	of	 the	 two	 trigrams,	 in
order	to	show	how	a	given	situation	can	be	overcome,	we	have	in	this	instance	an	explanation	of	how	to
accept	and	adapt	to	the	situation.	Even	as	rain	rises	to	the	heavens,	it	is	preparing	to	fall—whereby	all	life
is	nourished	and	 refreshed.	The	 superior	man	acts	 in	accordance	with	 this,	 and	 so	masters	 the	 second
meaning	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 for	 Hsü	 signifies	 nourishment	 as	 well	 as	 waiting.	 Further,	 the	 two	 nuclear
trigrams—Li,	clarity,	and	Tui,	pleasure,	joyousness—also	play	a	part.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Waiting	in	the	meadow.
It	furthers	one	to	abide	in	what	endures.
No	blame.
b)	“Waiting	in	the	meadow.”	One	does	not	seek	out	difficulties	overhastily.
“It	furthers	one	to	abide	in	what	endures.	No	blame.”	One	has	not	abandoned	the	general	ground.

Because	the	lowest	line	is	firm,	it	does	not	unduly	press	any	matter	in	the	face	of	a	danger	that	is	still
remote	 (hence	 the	 image	 of	 the	 meadow),	 but	 is	 able	 to	 remain	 calm	 and	 collected	 as	 if	 nothing
extraordinary	lay	ahead.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Waiting	on	the	sand.
There	is	some	gossip.
The	end	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“Waiting	on	the	sand.”	One	is	calm,	for	the	line	is	central.	Although	this	leads	to	some	gossip,

the	end	brings	good	fortune.



This	line	is	even	nearer	to	the	danger	symbolized	in	the	upper	trigram	than	the	first	line,	therefore	the
waiting	 on	 the	 sand.	 But	 it	 is	 well	 balanced;	 the	 capability	 of	 its	 nature	 is	 mitigated	 by	 the	 yielding
character	of	the	place,	which	moreover	is	central.	Therefore	it	remains	calm	despite	minor	discords	(it	is
not	in	the	relation	of	correspondence	to	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	but	rather,	since	the	two	lines	are	of
the	 same	 category,	 in	 the	 relation	 of	mutual	 repulsion),	 hence	 all	 goes	well.	Gossip	 is	 indicated	by	 the
nuclear	trigram	Tui.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Waiting	in	the	mud
Brings	about	the	arrival	of	the	enemy.
b)	“Waiting	in	the	mud.”	The	misfortune	is	outside.1
“Brings	about	the	arrival	of	the	enemy.”	Seriousness	and	caution	prevent	defeat.

The	strong	line	in	the	strong	place	is	too	energetic.	It	faces	danger	and	plunges	into	it,	thus	inviting
enemies.	Only	through	caution	is	this	harm	to	be	avoided.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Waiting	in	blood.
Get	out	of	the	pit.
b)	“Waiting	in	blood.”	He	is	yielding	and	obeys.

This	 is	 a	weak	 line	 in	 a	weak	 place;	 consequently,	 although	 in	 the	midst	 of	 danger	 and	 hemmed	 in
between	two	strong	lines	(K’an	means	pit	and	blood),	it	does	not	make	things	worse	by	pressing	forward.
Instead,	it	submits,	and	the	storm	passes	over.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Waiting	at	meat	and	drink.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	 “Meat	 and	 drink.	 Perseverance	 brings	 good	 fortune,”	 because	 of	 the	 central	 and	 correct

character.
This	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.	As	such,	it	occupies	the	center	of	the	upper	primary	trigram.	It

has	a	strong	place	corresponding	with	its	strong	character,	hence	it	is	correct.	Moreover,	it	is	at	the	top	of
the	 upper	 nuclear	 trigram	 Li,	 light,	 which	 gives	 it	 enlightenment.	 Altogether,	 this	 gives	 prospect	 of
favorable	conditions.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	One	falls	into	the	pit.
Three	uninvited	guests	arrive.
Honor	them,	and	in	the	end	there	will	be	good	fortune.
b)	“Uninvited	guests	arrive.	If	they	are	honored,	in	the	end	there	will	be	good	fortune.”	Although

the	line	is	not	in	its	proper	place,	at	least	no	great	mistake	is	made.
A	yielding	line	at	the	high	point	of	danger,	at	the	very	top	of	the	hexagram,	is	not	really	in	its	proper

place	(K’an	connotes	a	pit).	Although	to	all	appearances	a	weak	line	in	a	weak	place	is	where	it	should	be,
a	certain	impropriety	arises	from	the	fact	that	it	stands	at	the	top,	while	the	line	corresponding	with	it,
the	strong	third	line,	is	below.	The	arrival	of	three	uninvited	guests	is	suggested	by	this	third	line	and	the
two	lower	ones	of	the	trigram	Ch’ien,	which	hold	together	with	it.	Since	by	virtue	of	their	strong	natures
they	 are	 not	 jealous,	 everything	 goes	 well,	 if	 the	 yin	 line	 follows	 its	 yielding	 nature	 and	 meets	 them
deferentially.

NOTE.	The	situation	revealed	in	WAITING	is	one	in	which	a	strong,	firm	nature	is	faced	with	danger.
What	is	required	of	the	individual	here	is	restraint.	He	must	await	the	proper	time;	he	must	be	yielding
and	 remain	 calm.	 If	 he	 does	 not	 weigh	 the	 time	 conditions	 sufficiently	 and	 presses	 forward,	 ruthless,
angry,	and	restless,	he	will	certainly	meet	defeat.	The	nine	at	the	beginning	is	still	far	from	danger;	hence
if	one	holds	to	lasting	things,	one	can	avoid	mistakes.	The	nine	in	the	second	place	is	approaching	closer
to	danger,	but	it	too	can	ultimately	attain	good	fortune	by	yielding	and	by	keeping	to	the	middle	way.	The
nine	 in	 the	 third	place	 is	actually	under	 threat	of	danger,	 therefore	 it	 is	said;	“Seriousness	and	caution
prevent	defeat.”	The	six	in	the	fourth	place	has	been	overtaken	by	danger,	but	because	it	is	yielding	and
peaceful,	 it	 gets	 out	 of	 the	 pit	 again.	 The	 six	 at	 the	 top	 is	 at	 the	 peak	 point	 of	 danger,	 but	 through
deference	it	too	finally	attains	good	fortune.	Thus	during	a	time	of	waiting,	self-control	and	deference	are
the	means	of	avoiding	harm.	The	significance	of	the	time	of	danger	is	great.



6.	Sung	/	Conflict

The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 All	 the	 other	 lines	 represent	 persons
quarreling,	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	stands	for	the	person	who	overhears	the	quarrel.	This	is	what	is
referred	to	by	the	following	sentence	from	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“’It	furthers	one	to	see	the
great	man’:	thus	his	central	and	correct	position	is	honored.”

The	Sequence
Over	meat	and	drink,	there	is	certain	to	be	conflict.
Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	CONFLICT.
Miscellaneous	Notes
CONFLICT	means	not	to	love.

THE	JUDGMENT
CONFLICT.	You	are	sincere
And	are	being	obstructed.
A	cautious	halt	halfway	brings	good	fortune.
Going	through	to	the	end	brings	misfortune.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
It	does	not	further	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
CONFLICT:	strength	is	above,	danger	below.	Danger	and	strength	produce	conflict.
“The	contender	is	sincere	and	is	being	obstructed.”
The	firm	comes	and	attains	the	middle.
“Going	 through	 to	 the	 end	 brings	 misfortune.	 A	 conflict	 must	 not	 be	 allowed	 to	 become

permanent.”
“It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man”:	thus	his	central	and	correct	position	is	honored.
“It	does	not	further	one	to	cross	the	great	water,”	for	this	would	lead	one	into	the	abyss.

The	name	of	 the	 hexagram	of	CONFLICT	 is	 derived	 from	 the	 attributes	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams	Ch’ien,
strength,	and	K’an,	danger.	When	strength	is	above	and	cunning	below,	conflict	is	sure	to	arise.	Similarly,
a	person	who	is	inwardly	cunning	and	outwardly	strong	inclines	to	conflict	with	others.

The	contender,	the	second	line,	is	sincere	and	feels	himself	obstructed.	He	is	in	the	inner	trigram,	and
therefore	it	is	said,	“He	comes.”	Because	the	line	is	strong	and	occupies	the	center,	it	suggests	sincerity,
for	 it	makes	 the	middle	 “sound.”	 It	 is	 obstructed	because	 it	 is	 inclosed	between	 the	 two	yin	 lines.	The
great	man	is	the	central	and	correct	line	in	the	fifth	place.	The	judge	who	must	render	the	decision	abides
outside	the	dangerous	situation.	He	can	render	a	just	decision	only	by	remaining	impartial.	The	abyss	into
which	one	would	fall	by	crossing	the	great	water	is	indicated	by	the	trigram	K’an,	danger.	Crossing	of	the
great	water	is	suggested	by	the	fact	that	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	wood,	is	over	the	lower	primary	trigram
K’an,	water.

Structurally,	 this	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the	 preceding	 one:	 hence	 we	 have	 conflict	 here,
forbearance	there.	Although	the	time	meaning	of	the	hexagram	is	that	of	conflict,	it	nevertheless	teaches
at	every	turn	that	conflict	should	be	avoided.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	and	water	go	their	opposite	ways:
The	image	of	CONFLICT.
Thus	in	all	his	transactions	the	superior	man
Carefully	considers	the	beginning.

The	movement	of	the	upper	trigram,	heaven,	goes	upward,	that	of	the	 lower,	water,	goes	downward;
thus	the	two	draw	farther	and	farther	apart,	and	create	conflict.	To	avoid	conflict,	all	transactions	(nuclear
trigram	Sun,	work,	undertaking)	must	be	well	considered	at	the	beginning	(K’an	means	being	concerned,
and	the	nuclear	trigram	Li	means	clarity;	Ch’ien	is	the	beginning	of	all	things).

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	If	one	does	not	perpetuate	the	affair,
There	is	a	little	gossip.
In	the	end,	good	fortune	comes.
b)	Not	perpetuating	the	affair:	one	must	not	prolong	the	conflict.
Although	“there	is	a	little	gossip,”	the	matter	is	finally	decided	clearly.

The	 six	 is	 weak	 and	 at	 the	 very	 bottom.	 Therefore,	 although	 there	 is	 a	 brief	 altercation	 with	 the
neighboring	nine,	which	comes	from	without,	the	conflict	cannot	continue—the	place	and	the	character	of
the	 line	 are	 too	 weak.	 Since	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Li,	 standing	 above	 it,	 has	 clarity	 as	 its	 attribute,
everything	 is	 finally	decided	 justly—a	 fortunate	 thing	 in	a	conflict.	As	 the	 six	 changes,	 there	arises	 the
trigram	Tui,	speech.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	



a)	One	cannot	engage	in	conflict;
One	returns	home,	gives	way.
The	people	of	his	town,
Three	hundred	households,
Remain	free	of	guilt.
b)	“One	cannot	engage	 in	conflict:	one	returns	home,	gives	way.”	Thus	one	escapes.	To	contend

from	a	lowly	place	with	someone	above	brings	self-incurred	suffering.
One	 cannot	 engage	 in	 conflict,	 although	 in	 this	 hard	 line	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 trigram	 K’an,	 the

Abysmal,	intention	to	contend	with	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	is	inherently	present.	This	second	line,	being
a	nine,	moves;	that	is,	it	changes	into	a	yin	line.	Thereby	it	conceals	itself,	and	with	the	two	other	yin	lines
it	forms	the	town	of	three	hundred	families,	who	remain	free	of	all	entanglement.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	To	nourish	oneself	on	ancient	virtue	induces	perseverance.
Danger.	In	the	end,	good	fortune	comes.
If	by	chance	you	are	in	the	service	of	a	king,
Seek	not	works.
b)	“To	nourish	oneself	on	ancient	virtue.”	To	obey	the	one	above	brings	good	fortune.

Because	the	line	is	weak	in	a	strong	place,	it	is	not	correct.	Above	and	below	are	strong	lines	hemming
it	 in.	Moreover,	being	 in	a	place	of	 transition,	 it	 is	 inwardly	restless.	All	 these	circumstances	constitute
elements	of	danger.	Still,	everything	goes	well,	provided	the	line	rests	content	with	what	it	has	honorably
acquired	from	its	ancestors.	It	corresponds	with	the	third	line	of	the	“mother”	hexagram,	K’un;	hence	the
oracle	for	this	line	in	K’un	is	repeated	here	in	part.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	One	cannot	engage	in	conflict.
One	turns	back	and	submits	to	fate,
Changes	one’s	attitude,
And	finds	peace	in	perseverance.
Good	fortune.
b)	“One	turns	back	and	submits	to	fate,	changes	one’s	attitude,	and	finds	peace	in	perseverance.”

Thus	nothing	is	lost.
This	line	is	neither	central	nor	correct,	and	therefore	originally	intended	to	quarrel.	But	it	cannot	do	so.

Over	it	is	the	strong	judge	in	the	fifth	place,	with	whom	one	may	not	quarrel.	Below	it	is	the	weak	line	in
the	third	place,	and	standing	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	it	is	the	weak	line	at	the	beginning,
neither	of	which	gives	cause	for	quarrel.	 Its	position	in	a	yielding	place	gives	this	 line	the	possibility	of
being	converted	and	of	turning	away	from	conflict.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	To	contend	before	him
Brings	supreme	good	fortune.
b)	“To	contend	before	him	brings	supreme	good	fortune,”	because	he	is	central	and	correct.

This	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram;	it	occupies	the	place	of	honor,	is	central,	correct,	and	strong.	All
this	fits	it	for	the	task	of	settling	the	quarrel,	so	that	great	good	fortune	comes	about	through	it.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Even	if	by	chance	a	leather	belt	is	bestowed	on	one,
By	the	end	of	a	morning
It	will	have	been	snatched	away	three	times.
b)	To	attain	distinction	through	conflict	is,	after	all,	nothing	to	command	respect.

A	strong	line	at	the	high	point	of	CONFLICT	seeks	to	win	distinction	through	conflict.	But	this	does	not
last.

NOTE.	The	nine	in	the	fifth	place	is	the	judge,	the	other	lines	the	contenders,	but	only	the	strong	lines
really	contend.	The	weak	lines	in	the	first	and	the	third	place	hold	back.	The	strong	lines	in	the	second
and	 the	 fourth	 place	 are	 inclined	 by	 nature	 to	 contend,	 but	 cannot	 quarrel	with	 the	 judge	 in	 the	 fifth
place,	and	the	weak	lines	below	them	offer	no	resistance.	Therefore	they	too	withdraw	from	the	conflict	in
good	time.	Only	the	strong	top	line	carries	the	conflict	through	to	the	end	and,	being	in	the	relationship	of
correspondence	to	the	weak	line	in	the	third	place,	it	triumphs	and	receives	a	distinction.	Yet	the	line	is
analogous	to	the	top	line—the	“arrogant	dragon”—of	the	hexagram	Ch’ien.	It	will	have	cause	to	rue	the
matter.	What	is	won	by	force	is	wrested	away	by	force.



7.	Shih	/	The	Army

The	 rulers	 of	 the	 hexagram	 are	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 and	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth.	 The	 former,
positioned	below,	is	the	strong	man,	while	the	latter,	being	above,	has	capacity	to	employ	the	strong	man.

The	Sequence
When	there	is	conflict,	the	masses	are	sure	to	rise	up.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	THE

ARMY.	Army	means	mass.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	ARMY	means	mourning.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	ARMY.	The	army	needs	perseverance
And	a	strong	man.
Good	fortune	without	blame.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	ARMY	means	the	masses.	Perseverance	means	discipline.
The	man	who	can	effect	discipline	through	the	masses	may	attain	mastery	of	the	world.
The	strong	one	is	central	and	finds	response.
One	does	a	dangerous	thing	but	finds	devotion.
The	man	who	thus	leads1	the	world	is	followed	by	the	people.
Good	fortune.	How	could	this	be	a	mistake?

This	 hexagram	 consists	 of	 a	 mass	 of	 yielding	 lines	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 which,	 in	 a	 central	 although
subordinate	place,	is	a	single	strong	line.	As	a	general,	not	as	a	ruler,	it	holds	the	others	under	control.
From	this	arises	the	idea	of	the	mass	(the	many	yielding	lines)	and	of	the	army—a	disciplined	multitude.
The	firm	line	in	the	second	place	finds	support,	because	of	correspondence,	in	the	yielding	line	in	the	fifth
place,	the	place	of	the	ruler.	The	danger	of	the	action	is	indicated	by	the	lower	trigram,	K’an,	and	devotion
by	the	upper,	K’un.

THE	IMAGE
In	the	middle	of	the	earth	is	water:
The	image	of	THE	ARMY.
Thus	the	superior	man	increases	his	masses
By	generosity	toward	the	people.

Owing	to	the	compulsory	military	service	customary	in	antiquity,	the	supply	of	soldiers	available	from
the	 populace	 was	 as	 plentiful	 as	 water	 underground.	 Hence	 fostering	 the	 people	 ensured	 an	 efficient
army.
Great	 expanse	 is	 the	 attribute	 of	 the	 earth,	 which	 also	 represents	 the	 masses.	 Water	 stands	 for

serviceability;	everything	flows	toward	water.
THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	An	army	must	set	forth	in	proper	order.
If	the	order	is	not	good,	misfortune	threatens.
b)	“An	army	must	set	forth	in	proper	order.”2	Losing	order	is	unfortunate.

This	line	is	at	the	very	bottom	and	therefore	indicates	the	beginning,	the	marching	forth	of	the	army.
The	water	trigram	indicates	order	and	the	correct	use	of	the	army.	If	the	line	changes,	the	lower	trigram
becomes	Tui,	joyousness,	whereby	of	course	order	is	upset,	for	joyousness	is	not	the	proper	frame	of	mind
for	the	onset	of	war.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	In	the	midst	of	the	army.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.
The	king	bestows	a	triple	decoration.
b)	“In	the	midst	of	the	army.	Good	fortune.”	He	receives	grace	from	heaven.
“The	king	bestows	a	triple	decoration.”	He	has	the	welfare	of	all	countries	at	heart.

The	second	place	is	that	of	the	official,	 in	this	case	a	general,	as	this	is	the	hexagram	of	THE	ARMY.
The	 grace	 of	 heaven	 derives	 from	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	which,	 occupying	 a	 place	 in	 the	 sphere	 of
heaven,	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	this	line.	The	triple	decoration	derives	from	the
three	lines	all	of	like	kind	composing	the	upper	trigram	K’un.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Perchance	the	army	carries	corpses	in	the	wagon.
Misfortune.
b)	“Perchance	the	army	carries	corpses	in	the	wagon.”
This	is	quite	without	merit.

The	upper	trigram	is	K’un,	whose	image	is	the	wagon.	This	line	is	weak;	it	stands	at	the	peak	of	danger,



and	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	Chên,	 agitation.	 All	 of	 these	 are	 circumstances	 suggesting	 a
severe	defeat.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	army	retreats.	No	blame.
b)	“The	army	retreats.	No	blame,”	for	it	does	not	deviate	from	the	usual	way.

Literally	the	text	reads:	“The	army	turns	to	the	left.”	In	war,	“to	the	right”	is	the	equivalent	of	“in	the
van,”	and	“to	the	left”	is	the	equivalent	of	“in	the	rear.”	The	line	is	extremely	weak,	because	it	is	weak	by
nature	and	also	in	a	weak	place.	Yet	it	is	in	the	place	appropriate	to	it;	hence	retreat,	for	which	it	is	not	to
be	censured.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	There	is	game	in	the	field.
It	furthers	one	to	catch	it.
Without	blame.
Let	the	eldest	lead	the	army.
The	younger	transports	corpses;
Then	perseverance	brings	misfortune.
b)	“Let	the	eldest	lead	the	army,”	because	he	is	central	and	correct.
“The	younger	transports	corpses.”	Thus	the	right	man	is	not	put	in	charge.

The	trigram	K’an	means	pig;	the	“field”	is	the	earth	(K’un).	To	the	inside	of	the	trigram	K’un	(field)	is
K’an	(pig,	i.e.,	game).	Therefore	it	furthers	one	to	catch	it.	The	literal	rendering	would	be:	“To	explain	his
mistakes.”	 This	 interpretation,	 however,	 is	 not	 as	 satisfactory.3	 The	 “eldest”	 is	 the	 strong	 nine	 in	 the
second	place,	and	it	is	this	line	that	ought	to	lead	the	army.	If	some	other	without	experience	leads	it	(the
reference	is	to	the	six	in	the	third	place),	the	result	will	be	that	corpses	must	be	transported—that	is	to
say,	there	will	be	a	defeat.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	great	prince	issues	commands,
Founds	states,	vests	families	with	fiefs.
Inferior	people	should	not	be	employed.
b)	“The	great	prince	issues	commands,”	in	order	to	reward	merit	properly.
“Inferior	 people	 should	 not	 be	 employed,”	 because	 they	 are	 certain	 to	 cause	 confusion	 in	 the

country.
The	top	place	shows	the	victorious	end	of	war.	The	great	prince	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	Here,	as

occasionally	elsewhere	in	the	case	of	a	six	at	the	top,	an	additional	statement	concerning	the	line	in	the
fifth	place	is	given—from	the	outward,	objective	standpoint.	The	merit	rewarded	is	that	of	the	nine	in	the
second	place;	the	inferior	people	are	represented	by	the	six	in	the	third	place.



8.	Pi	/	Holding	Together	[Union]

The	ruler	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	for	the	hexagram	is	so	organized	that	it	contains	only	one	yang
line,	which	occupies	the	place	of	honor	and	holds	together	with	all	the	yin	lines	above	and	below	it.

The	Sequence
Among	 the	 masses	 there	 is	 surely	 a	 reason	 for	 uniting.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

HOLDING	TOGETHER.	Holding	together	means	uniting.
Miscellaneous	Notes
HOLDING	TOGETHER	is	something	joyous.

THE	JUDGMENT
HOLDING	TOGETHER	brings	good	fortune.
Inquire	of	the	oracle	once	again
Whether	you	possess	sublimity,	constancy,	and	perseverance;
Then	there	is	no	blame.
Those	who	are	uncertain	gradually	join.
Whoever	comes	too	late
Meets	with	misfortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“HOLDING	TOGETHER	brings	good	fortune.”	Holding	together	means	mutual	help.	Those	below

are	devoted	and	obedient.
This	hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	of	 the	preceding	one.	 In	 the	 latter	 the	general,	 the	nine	 in	 the	 second

place,	 is	 the	center,	while	here	the	center	 is	 the	nine	 in	the	fifth	place,	 the	strong,	central,	and	correct
prince.	All	the	other	lines	are	yielding,	hence	the	relationship	of	mutual	supplementation	and	assistance.
The	yielding	lines	are	the	subordinates	who	obey.	Thus	the	name	of	the	hexagram	is	explained	through	its
structure.

“Inquire	 of	 the	 oracle	 once	 again	whether	 you	 possess	 sublimity,	 constancy,	 and	 perseverance.
Then	there	is	no	blame,”	because	of	the	firmness	and	central	position.

“Those	who	are	uncertain	gradually	join.”	Above	and	below	are	in	correspondence.
“Whoever	comes	too	late	meets	with	misfortune.”
His	way	is	at	an	end.

The	 line	 to	 which	 everything	 relates	 is	 the	 prince	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 All	 the	 yielding	 lines	 below
correspond	with	it.	These	five	lines	mutually	hold	together;	thereby	they	attain	power,	and	it	is	a	joyous
matter.	The	only	one	 that	stays	apart	and	does	not	enter	 into	 the	general	union	 is	 the	six	at	 the	 top;	 it
insists	on	going	its	own	way,	which	leads	to	nothing.
The	hexagram	Pi,	HOLDING	TOGETHER,	like	the	hexagram	Ts’ui,	GATHERING	TOGETHER	(45),	has

the	trigram	K’un	below,	but	instead	of	Tui,	the	lake,	here	there	is	K’an,	water,	above.	There	is	very	little
difference	in	meaning	between	the	two	hexagrams.	“Sublimity,	constancy,	and	perseverance”	apply	here
to	the	whole	hexagram,	while	in	Ts’ui	they	apply	only	to	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.
In	 the	 hexagram	 Mêng,	 YOUTHFUL	 FOLLY,	 there	 is	 a	 reference	 to	 “the	 first	 oracle,”	 and	 the

commentary	relates	 it	 to	 the	 firm	central	 line.	There	K’an,	meaning	wisdom,	darkness,	oracle,	 is	below,
and	 the	 firm	 line	 appears	 in	 the	 first	 trigram.	Here	 it	 is	 said:	 “Inquire	 of	 the	 oracle	 once	 again.”	 The
explanation	in	the	commentary	points	likewise	to	the	firm	central	line.	But	here	K’an	is	above,	hence	the
firm	line	appears	in	the	second,	that	is,	the	upper	trigram.

THE	IMAGE
On	the	earth	is	water:
The	image	of	HOLDING	TOGETHER.
Thus	the	kings	of	antiquity
Bestowed	the	different	states	as	fiefs
And	cultivated	friendly	relations
With	the	feudal	lords.

The	water	 on	 the	 earth	 holds	 together	with	 it.	 From	 this	 fact	 a	 double	 lesson	 is	 deduced.	As	water
penetrates	and	gives	moisture	to	the	earth,	so	should	fiefs	be	distributed	from	above;	and	as	waters	flow
together	on	the	earth,	so	should	the	organization	of	society	show	union.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Hold	to	him	in	truth	and	loyalty;
This	is	without	blame.
Truth,	like	a	full	earthen	bowl:
Thus	in	the	end
Good	fortune	comes	from	without.
b)	 The	 six	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 HOLDING	 TOGETHER	 encounters	 good	 fortune	 from	 another

quarter.
This	 line	stands	at	 the	bottom;	 it	 is	weak	and	 in	no	direct	relation	to	the	ruler	of	 the	hexagram.	But



since	the	attitude	in	the	holding	together	is	sincere—the	line	is	at	the	bottom	of	the	trigram	K’un,	whose
attribute	is	devotion—it	will	attain	what	it	strives	for,	and	this	unexpectedly	from	the	outside.	The	earth
has	for	its	symbol	the	kettle,	the	utensil	for	receiving	the	blessing	that	comes	from	above.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Hold	to	him	inwardly.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“Hold	to	him	inwardly.”	Do	not	lose	yourself.

This	yielding	line	of	the	inner	trigram,	which	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	ruler
of	the	hexagram,	suggests	the	 idea	of	holding	together	 inwardly.	But	 just	because	this	holding	together
bespeaks	an	inner	affinity	and	hence	is	inevitable,	it	does	not	depend	on	unworthy	external	maneuvers.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	You	hold	together	with	the	wrong	people.
b)	“You	hold	together	with	the	wrong	people.”	Is	this	not	injurious?

The	line	is	weak	and	in	the	place	of	transition,	that	is,	restless,	not	central,	and	not	correct.	The	lines
below	and	above	it,	as	well	as	the	six	at	the	top,	with	which	there	is	a	relation,	are	all	dark	lines.	Here
they	denote	evil	people.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Hold	to	him	outwardly	also.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	Hold	outwardly	also	to	people	of	worth,	in	order	thus	to	follow	the	one	above.

The	firm	line	in	the	fifth	place	is	a	worthy	ruler,	while	the	yielding	line	in	the	fourth	place	represents
the	minister.	A	minister	may	show	outwardly	his	loyalty	to	his	worthy	ruler.	This	situation	differs	from	that
of	the	six	in	the	second	place,	the	official	as	yet	without	a	post.	Such	a	man	must	be	reserved	in	order	not
to	 lose	 dignity,	 but	 the	 minister	 firmly	 established	 in	 an	 official	 relationship	 may	 safely	 show	 his
attachment.	Since	the	line	is	not	attracted	by	the	six	at	the	beginning,	it	is	free	to	follow	the	one	above
with	undivided	allegiance.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Manifestation	of	holding	together.
In	the	hunt	the	king	uses	beaters	on	three	sides	only
And	foregoes	game	that	runs	off	in	front.
The	citizens	need	no	warning.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	resulting	from	“manifestation	of	holding	together”	inheres	in	the	fact	that	the

position	is	correct	and	central.
Discarding	 those	who	resist,	accepting	 the	devoted:	 this	 is	 the	meaning	of	 “foregoes	game	 that

runs	off	in	front.”
“The	citizens	need	no	warning,”	for	the	one	above	makes	them	central.

This	is	the	image	of	a	ruler	whose	followers	gather	around	him	from	natural	instinct.	He	merely	makes
manifest	what	is	inherent	in	each	individual.	The	spontaneity	of	this	holding	together	is	presented	in	an
image	of	the	royal	hunt	and	its	customs.	The	quarry	accepted	are	the	lower	lines,	which	voluntarily	offer
themselves.	The	quarry	that	resists	and	hence	is	not	taken	into	consideration	is	the	six	at	the	top.	Here
again,	as	in	the	preceding	hexagram,	an	image	of	the	hunt	is	used,	but	in	the	latter	the	game	is	pursued,
while	 here	 it	 is	 allowed	 to	 go	 free.	 There	 the	 lower	 nuclear	 trigram	 is	 Chên,	 whose	 movement	 goes
upward;	here	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	is	Kên,	Keeping	Still;	therefore	the	movement,	starting	with	the
nine	in	the	fifth	place,	is	downward	only,	not	upward.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	finds	no	head	for	holding	together.
Misfortune.
b)	“He	finds	no	head	for	holding	together.”	Therefore	he	also	fails	to	find	the	right	end.

This	line	takes	its	position	above	the	ruling	yang	line.	While	the	lower	yielding	lines	find	their	head	in
this	 yang	 line,	 the	 yin	 line	 at	 the	 top	 has	 no	 head	 to	 follow	 and	must	 therefore	 go	 astray,	 particularly
because	it	stands	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	K’an,	danger.
The	 expression	 “no	 head”	 occurs	 also	 in	 the	 hexagram	 of	 THE	CREATIVE.	 There	 it	 has	 a	 favorable

meaning,	because	the	hexagram	has	nothing	but	strong	lines,	and	thus	the	expression	signifies	humility.
Here	it	is	unfavorable,	because	the	line	is	yielding.	A	yielding	element	with	“no	head”	bodes	ill,	because
there	is	nothing	to	steady	it.



9.	Hsiao	Ch’u	/	The	Taming	Power	of	the	Small

The	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	the	constituting	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	its
governing	 ruler.1	 The	 six	 in	 the	 fourth	 place,	 as	 the	 only	 yin	 line,	 restrains	 the	 yang	 lines.	 The
Commentary	on	the	Decision	refers	to	this	as	follows:	“The	yielding	obtains	the	decisive	place,	and	those
above	and	those	below	correspond	with	it.”	The	nine	in	the	fifth	place	accords	in	attitude	with	the	six	in
the	fourth	place,	thus	to	perfect	the	restraint;	hence	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The
strong	is	central	and	its	will	is	done.”

The	Sequence
Through	holding	together,	restraint	 is	certain	to	come	about.	Hence	there	follows	THE	TAMING

POWER	OF	THE	SMALL.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL	is	slight.

This	refers	to	the	fact	that	“the	small”	here	occupies	the	place	of	the	official.	Compare	the	hexagram	Ta
Yu,	 POSSESSION	 IN	GREAT	MEASURE	 (14),	 in	which	 the	 small	 and	 yielding	 element	 is	 in	 the	 ruler’s
place.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL
Has	success.
Dense	clouds,	no	rain	from	our	western	region.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL.	The	yielding	obtains	the	decisive	place,	and	those	above

and	those	below	correspond	with	it:	this	is	called	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL.
Strong	and	gentle:	the	strong	is	central	and	its	will	is	done,	therefore	“success.”
“Dense	clouds,	no	rain”:	the	movement	goes	still	further.
“From	our	western	region”:	the	influence	has	not	yet	set	in.

The	small,	yielding	line	in	the	place	of	the	minister	holds	the	decisive	place.	The	firm	lines	above	and
below	all	 correspond	with	 it.	 This	 structure	 explains	 the	 name	 of	 the	 hexagram.	Success	 is	 due	 to	 the
character	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams,	 inner	 strength	 coupled	 with	 outer	 gentleness.	 This	 is	 the	 way	 to
achievement.	Moreover,	the	ruler	is	central	and	his	will	is	done.	The	upper	trigram	Sun,	wind,	has	enough
strength	 to	 condense	 the	mists	 rising	up	 from	 the	 lower	 trigram	Ch’ien,	 and	 so	 to	 form	clouds,	but	 its
strength	does	not	suffice	to	cause	rain.	“Western	region”	is	suggested	by	the	original	position	of	Sun,	in
the	west	(in	the	arrangement	of	the	trigrams	called	the	Sequence	of	Earlier	Heaven2;	in	the	Sequence	of
Later	Heaven,	 Tui,	 the	 lake,	 has	 the	 position	 in	 the	west).	When	 Tui	 stands	 over	 Ch’ien,	 we	 have	 the
hexagram	 of	 BREAKTHROUGH	 (43);	 in	 the	 latter	 case	 the	 water	 vapor	 is	 already	 condensed	 and	 will
descend	 easily.	 In	 the	 present	 hexagram	 Tui	 appears	 over	 Ch’ien	 only	 as	 a	 nuclear	 trigram,	 not	 yet
separated	from	it.	In	China,	the	rain	clouds	always	come	from	the	east,	from	the	direction	of	the	sea,	not
from	the	west.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	drives	across	heaven:
The	image	of	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL.
Thus	the	superior	man
Refines	the	outward	aspect	of	his	nature.

The	wind	penetrates	everywhere;	this	means	refinement.	The	lower	trigram	is	heaven;	this	means	the
essence	of	character.	The	upper	nuclear	trigram	is	Li,	form.	This	refinement	of	outer	form,	as	contrasted
with	the	carrying	out	of	fundamental	principles,	is	“the	small.”

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Return	to	the	way.
How	could	there	be	blame	in	this?
Good	fortune.
b)	“Return	to	the	way.”	This	is	something	that	bodes	well.

This	 strong	 yang	 line,	 belonging	 to	 the	 rising	 trigram	Ch’ien,	 naturally	 tends	 upward,	 but	 it	 is	 held
back	 by	 the	 yielding	 line	 in	 the	 fourth	 place.	 As	 it	 stands	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the
latter,	 it	 retreats	 again	without	 offering	 opposition,	 so	 that	 all	 struggle	 is	 avoided.	 The	 good	 augury	 is
based	on	this.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	He	allows	himself	to	be	drawn	into	returning.
Good	fortune.
b)	Being	drawn	into	returning	derives	from	the	central	position.	Also,	he	does	not	lose	himself.

This	line	is	higher	than	the	first	and	likewise	tends	upward	by	nature.	But	because	of	its	central	and



moderate	position	 in	 the	 lower	 trigram	Ch’ien,	 it	 attaches	 itself	 to	 the	 first	 line	and	 retreats	without	a
struggle.	Thus	it	assumes	an	attitude	that	saves	it	from	losing	itself	or	throwing	itself	away,	as	would	be
the	case	if	it	offered	itself	despite	its	being	checked	by	the	fourth	line.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	spokes	burst	out	of	the	wagon	wheels.
Man	and	wife	roll	their	eyes.
b)	When	“man	and	wife	roll	their	eyes,”	it	is	a	sign	that	they	cannot	keep	their	house	in	order.

The	 idea	of	 the	spokes	bursting	out	of	 the	wagon	wheels	 is	suggested	by	 the	 fact	 that	Ch’ien,	being
round,	symbolizes	a	wheel,	and	that	Tui,	the	lower	nuclear	trigram,	means	breaking	apart.	Li,	the	upper
nuclear	trigram,	means	eyes,	and	Sun,	the	upper	primary	trigram,	means	much	white	in	the	eyes;	hence
the	rolling	of	the	eyes.

This	 line	 has	 the	 same	 upward	 tendency	 as	 the	 two	 preceding	 ones,	 but	 while	 the	 latter	 renounce
conflict	 and	 retreat	 voluntarily,	 this	 line	 (too	 strong	 because	 it	 is	 strong	 in	 a	 strong	 place,	 unstable
because	it	is	in	a	place	of	transition)	tries	to	push	on	by	force.	The	yielding	fourth	line	represents	the	wife,
who	allows	 the	spokes	of	 the	wheels,	belonging	 to	 the	 third	 line,	her	husband,	 to	get	broken.	The	man
looks	at	her	 fiercely	 in	his	rage,	and	she	returns	the	 look.	 Inasmuch	as	the	third	 line	thus	abandons	 its
family	(the	two	lower	lines),	it	shows	that	it	cannot	maintain	order.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	If	you	are	sincere,	blood	vanishes	and	fear	gives	way.
No	blame.
b)	“If	you	are	sincere	…	fear	gives	way,”	because	the	one	at	the	top	agrees	in	attitude.

This	 line,	 in	 the	midst	of	 the	strong	 lines,	 is	empty	within,	 that	 is,	 sincere	 (cf.	hexagram	61,	 INNER
TRUTH).	 It	 is	 the	middle	 line	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	Li,	which	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	K’an,	 blood	 and	 fear;
hence	the	absence	of	blood	and	fear.	The	fourth	place	 is	 that	of	 the	minister.	 It	has	the	difficult	 task	of
controlling	with	weak	powers	the	upward-striving	lower	lines.	This	is	necessarily	associated	with	danger
and	fear,	but	because	the	 line	 is	sincere	(yielding	 in	a	yielding	place,	and	empty	within)	the	prince,	 the
nine	in	the	fifth	place,	stands	by	it	and	gives	it	the	needed	support.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	If	you	are	sincere	and	loyally	attached,
You	are	rich	in	your	neighbor.
b)	“If	you	are	sincere	and	loyally	attached,”	you	will	not	be	alone	in	your	riches.

The	fifth	line	is	in	the	place	of	honor,	in	the	middle	of	the	trigram	Sun,	riches.	Sun	also	means	a	bond,
and	therefore	the	line	is	attached	to	the	six	in	the	fourth	place,	its	neighbor.	In	that	the	two	complement
each	other	and	share	their	wealth,	they	are	rich	indeed.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	rain	comes,	there	is	rest.
This	is	due	to	the	lasting	effect	of	character.
Perseverance	brings	the	woman	into	danger.
The	moon	is	nearly	full.
If	the	superior	man	persists,
Misfortune	comes.
b)	“The	rain	comes,	there	is	rest.”	This	is	the	continuously	cumulative	effect	of	character.
“If	the	superior	man	persists,	misfortune	comes,”	for	there	might	be	doubts.

Because	the	line	moves,	being	a	nine,	the	trigram	Sun,	wind,	becomes	the	trigram	K’an,	rain	and	moon.
The	line	stands	at	the	top	of	Sun—gentle	and	devoted—which	has	gradually	accumulated	within	itself	the
powers	of	 the	Creative,	 so	 that	 the	desired	effect	has	been	achieved.	When	 this	 effect	 of	 the	Gentle	 is
attained,	it	must	suffice.	Should	it	insistently	presume	upon	its	success,	danger	might	ensue.	Persistence
would	lead	to	a	doubtful	situation,	because	restraint	would	then	turn	into	suppression,	and	this	the	strong
Ch’ien	would	certainly	not	tolerate.



10.	Lü	/	Treading	[Conduct]

The	constituting	ruler	of	 the	hexagram	is	 the	six	 in	 the	 third	place;	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	place	 is	 the
governing	ruler.	The	six	in	the	third	place,	as	the	only	yielding	line	among	the	numerous	firm	ones,	enters
their	midst	with	fear	and	trembling.	Therefore	the	hexagram	bears	the	name	TREADING.	Whoever	holds
an	honored	place	must	especially	be	constantly	mindful	of	danger	and	fear.	Because	of	this	the	judgment
on	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 couples	 the	 idea	 of	 danger	 with	 perseverance.	 The	 Commentary	 on	 the
Decision	says	of	this	line:	“Strong,	central,	and	correct,	he	treads	into	the	place	of	the	ruler	and	remains
without	blame.”

The	Sequence
When	 beings	 are	 subjected	 to	 restraint	 the	 mores	 arise;	 hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

CONDUCT.
Miscellaneous	Notes
That	which	treads	does	not	stay.
Appended	Judgments1
TREADING	 shows	 the	 basis	 of	 character.	 It	 is	 harmonious	 and	 attains	 its	 goal.	 It	 brings	 about

harmonious	conduct.
This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the	 preceding	 one.	 The	 movement	 of	 the	 two	 primary	 trigrams	 is

upward,	hence	 the	 idea	 that	 the	one	strides	behind	the	other.	The	youngest	daughter	walks	behind	the
father.

THE	JUDGMENT
TREADING.	Treading	upon	the	tail	of	the	tiger.
It	does	not	bite	the	man.	Success.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
TREADING:	the	yielding	treads	upon	the	firm.	Joyous,	and	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence

to	the	Creative;	hence,	“Treading	upon	the	tail	of	the	tiger.	It	does	not	bite	the	man.	Success.”
Strong,	central,	and	correct,	he	treads	into	the	place	of	the	ruler	and	remains	without	blame:	his

light	shines	bright.
The	yielding	that	treads	upon	the	firm	is	the	lower	trigram	Tui,	which	follows	the	trigram	Ch’ien.	Thus

the	forms	of	the	two	trigrams	explain	the	name	of	the	hexagram.
Joyousness	 is	 the	 attribute	 of	 Tui,	 the	 lower	 trigram,	 which	 moves	 in	 the	 same	 direction	 as	 the

Creative,	the	strong;	hence	the	image	of	treading	upon	the	tail	of	the	tiger	(Tui	stands	in	the	west,	which
is	symbolized	by	the	tiger).	The	tiger’s	tail	 is	mentioned	because	the	weak	line	in	Tui	comes	behind	the
three	lines	of	Ch’ien.	In	addition,	it	is	to	be	noted	that	the	yielding	line	in	the	lower	trigram	stands	over
the	two	firm	lines.

The	comment	“strong,	central,	and	correct”	refers	to	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	central	line	of	the
upper	 trigram,	Ch’ien;	 this	 line	occupies	a	place	 in	 the	 sphere	of	heaven,	hence	 the	place	of	 the	 ruler.
Light	 is	 the	 primary	 characteristic	 of	 the	 trigram	 Ch’ien;	 furthermore,	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Li,	 whose
attribute	is	light,	is	contained	in	the	hexagram.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	above,	the	lake	below:
The	image	of	TREADING.
Thus	the	superior	man	discriminates	between	high	and	low,
And	thereby	fortifies	the	thinking	of	the	people.

Heaven	represents	what	is	highest,	the	lake	represents	what	is	 lowest;	these	differences	in	elevation
provide	a	rule	 for	conduct	and	mores.	Thus	 the	superior	man	creates	 in	society	 the	differences	 in	rank
that	 correspond	 with	 differences	 in	 natural	 endowment,	 and	 in	 this	 way	 fortifies	 the	 thinking	 of	 the
people,	who	are	reassured	when	these	differences	accord	with	nature.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Simple	conduct.	Progress	without	blame.
b)	The	progress	of	simple	conduct	follows	in	solitude	its	own	bent.

TREADING	means	behavior.	Good	behavior	is	determined	by	character.	This	line	is	at	the	beginning	of
the	hexagram,	hence	simplicity	is	the	right	thing	for	it.	It	progresses	independently.	Not	being	related	to
the	other	lines,	it	goes	its	way	alone,	but	since	it	is	strong,	this	agrees	exactly	with	its	inclination.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Treading	a	smooth,	level	course.
The	perseverance	of	a	dark	man
Brings	good	fortune.
b)	“The	perseverance	of	a	dark	man	brings	good	fortune.”	He	is	central	and	does	not	get	confused.

This	line	is	light,	but	occupies	a	dark	place,	hence	the	image	of	a	dark	man.	However,	since	he	walks	in
the	middle	of	the	road—the	line	is	central—he	does	not	meet	with	danger,	but	progresses	along	an	even



path	and	is	not	led	astray	by	wrong	relationships.
Six	in	the	third	place:

	
a)	A	one-eyed	man	is	able	to	see,
A	lame	man	is	able	to	tread.
He	treads	on	the	tail	of	the	tiger.
The	tiger	bites	the	man.
Misfortune.
Thus	does	a	warrior	act	on	behalf	of	his	great	prince.
b)	“A	one-eyed	man	is	able	to	see,”	but	not	enough	for	clarity.
“A	lame	man	is	able	to	tread,”	but	not	enough	to	tread	with	others.
The	misfortune	in	the	biting	of	the	man	is	due	to	the	fact	that	the	place	is	not	appropriate.
“Thus	does	a	warrior	act	on	behalf	of	his	great	prince,”	because	his	will	is	firm.

This	line	stands	in	both	the	nuclear	trigrams,	Li,	eye,	and	Sun,	leg.	But	since	it	is	not	correct—being
weak	in	a	strong	place—its	seeing	and	treading	are	defective.	Furthermore,	the	place	is	in	the	very	mouth
of	Tui,	the	lower	trigram,	hence	the	idea	that	the	tiger	bites.	As	a	weak	line	it	occupies	a	strong	place	and
rests	upon	a	firm	line.	Since	it	is	at	the	high	point	of	joyousness	(Tui),	it	is	light-minded	and	fails	to	retreat
despite	 the	 danger	 of	 the	 situation.	 This	 suggests	 that	 it	 treads	 on	 the	 tail	 of	 the	 tiger	 and	 is	 injured.
When	 the	 line	 changes,	 the	 lower	 trigram	 becomes	 Ch’ien.	 This	 suggests	 the	 warrior	 who	 pushes	 on
ruthlessly	in	order	to	serve	his	prince.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	treads	on	the	tail	of	the	tiger.
Caution	and	circumspection
Lead	ultimately	to	good	fortune.
b)	“Caution	and	circumspection	lead	ultimately	to	good	fortune,”	because	what	is	willed	is	done.

This	line	is	related	to	the	nine	at	the	beginning,	therefore	it	is	careful	when	treading	on	the	tail	of	the
tiger.	Its	quality	is	the	exact	opposite	of	that	of	the	foregoing	line:	in	the	latter,	we	have	inner	weakness
coupled	with	outward	aggressiveness,	which	leads	into	danger,	here	we	have	inner	strength	with	outward
caution,	which	leads	to	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Resolute	conduct.
Perseverance	with	awareness	of	danger.
b)	 “Resolute	 conduct.	 Perseverance	 with	 awareness	 of	 danger.”	 The	 place	 is	 correct	 and

appropriate.
The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 correct,	 central,	 strong,	 positioned	 in	 the	 ruler’s	 place,	 is	 pledged	 to

resolute	action.	At	the	same	time	he	is	aware	of	danger.	Hence	the	good	result	announced	in	the	judgment
on	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Look	to	your	conduct	and	weigh	the	favorable	signs.
When	everything	is	fulfilled,	supreme	good	fortune	comes.
b)	“Supreme	good	fortune”	in	the	topmost	place	carries	great	blessing.

The	 line	 stands	 at	 the	 end	 of	 TREADING	and	 therefore	 treads	 upon	 nothing	 further.	Hence	 it	 looks
back	 over	 its	 conduct.	 Since	 it	 has	 a	 strong	 character	 because	 of	 its	 nature	 (a	 strong	 line)	 and	 knows
caution	because	of	its	place,	good	fortune	is	assured.

NOTE.	This	hexagram	means	conduct,	with	the	secondary	meaning	of	good	manners.	In	practice,	good
manners	 depend	 on	 modesty	 and	 possession	 of	 a	 gracious	 ease.	 The	 hexagram	 consists	 of	 the	 Joyous
below,	 related	 to	 the	Creative,	 the	strong,	above.	Thus	 the	subordinate	 is	cautious	 in	 the	service	of	his
superior.

Strange	 to	 note,	 although	 the	 hexagram	 as	 a	 whole,	 owing	 to	 the	 character	 of	 its	 two	 trigrams,
contains	the	idea	that	the	tiger	on	whose	tail	the	man	treads	does	not	harm	him,	the	line	that	evokes	this
idea,	 the	six	 in	 the	 third	place,	 is	 the	very	 line	whose	 individual	 fate	 it	 is	 to	be	bitten	by	 the	 tiger.	The
reason	is	that	on	the	one	hand,	when	the	hexagram	is	considered	as	a	whole,	the	lower	trigram	as	a	unit	is
taken	as	joyous	and	obedient;	on	the	other,	however,	in	the	judgment	on	the	individual	line,	the	latter	is
evaluated	according	to	its	unfavorable	position,	which	bodes	ill	for	it.	Very	often	in	the	Book	of	Changes
one	can	note	 such	a	difference	between	 the	 judgment	pertaining	 to	 the	hexagram	as	a	whole	and	 that
pertaining	to	an	individual	line.



11.	T’ai	/	Peace

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	second	place	and	the	six	in	the	fifth.	The	meaning	of	the
hexagram	is	that	what	is	above	and	what	is	below	are	united	and	of	one	will.	The	nine	in	the	second	place
fulfills	 completely	 the	duties	 of	 the	official	 in	 relation	 to	 the	 ruler,	 and	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	place	 fulfills
completely	the	duties	of	the	ruler	in	relation	to	his	subordinates.	The	two	lines	are	the	constituting	as	well
as	the	governing	rulers.

The	Sequence
Good	conduct,	then	contentment;	thus	calm	prevails.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	PEACE.

Peace	means	union,	interrelation.
The	Chinese	word	t’ai	is	not	easy	to	translate.	It	means	contentment,	rest,	peace,	in	the	positive	sense

of	unobstructed,	complete	union,	bringing	about	a	time	of	flowering	and	greatness.	The	movement	of	the
lower	 trigram	 Ch’ien	 tends	 upward,	 that	 of	 the	 upper	 trigram	 K’un	 tends	 downward,	 and	 thus	 they
approach	each	other.	This	hexagram	is	correlated	with	the	first	month	(February–March).

Miscellaneous	Notes
The	hexagrams	of	STANDSTILL	and	PEACE	stand	in	natural	opposition	to	each	other.

THE	JUDGMENT
PEACE.	The	small	departs,
The	great	approaches.
Good	fortune.	Success.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
PEACE.	“The	small	departs,	the	great	approaches.	Good	fortune.	Success.”
In	this	way	heaven	and	earth	unite,	and	all	beings	come	into	union.
Upper	and	lower	unite,	and	they	are	of	one	will.
The	 light	principle	 is	within,	 the	 shadowy	without;	 strength	 is	within	and	devotion	without;	 the

superior	man	is	within,	the	inferior	without.
The	way	of	the	superior	man	is	waxing;	the	way	of	the	inferior	man	is	waning.

Taken	as	a	whole	and	as	one	of	the	“calendar”	hexagrams,	this	hexagram	is	interpreted	with	the	idea
that	the	strong	lines	entering	from	below	are	mounting,	while	the	weak	lines	above	are	withdrawing	from
the	hexagram.	Therefore,	“The	small	departs,	the	great	approaches.”

The	movement	of	the	two	trigrams	toward	each	other	gives	rise	to	another	interpretation.	The	lower,
ascending	trigram	is	Ch’ien,	heaven.	The	upper,	sinking	trigram	is	K’un,	the	earth.	Thus	the	two	primary
powers	unite,	and	all	things	enter	upon	union	and	development.	This	corresponds	with	the	state	of	things
at	the	beginning	of	the	year.

In	terms	of	the	human	world,	with	special	reference	to	two	lines—the	six	in	the	fifth	place	representing
the	prince,	and	the	nine	in	the	second	place	representing	the	officials—the	result	 is	unity	between	high
and	low,	their	wills	being	directed	to	a	common	goal.	The	positions	of	the	two	trigrams—within	(below)
and	without	(above)—lead	to	still	another	reflection.	The	yang	power	is	within,	the	yin	power	without.	This
points	to	a	difference	in	rank	between	the	ruling	yang	power	at	the	center	and	the	dependent	yin	power	at
the	 periphery;	 this	 is	 further	 emphasized	 by	 the	 respective	 attributes	 of	 the	 trigrams,	 strength	 and
devotion.	These	relative	positions	are	likewise	favorable	for	both	elements.

In	relation	to	the	political	field,	another	consideration	arises	from	the	difference	in	value	between	the
superior	persons	symbolized	by	the	light	lines	and	the	inferior	persons	symbolized	by	the	dark	lines.	Good
men	are	at	the	center	of	power	and	influence;	inferior	people	are	on	the	outside,	subject	to	the	influence
of	the	good.	This	likewise	works	for	the	good	of	the	whole.

The	movement	of	the	hexagram	as	a	whole	produces	finally	a	victorious	ascendancy	of	the	principles	of
the	good	man	and	a	withdrawal	and	defeat	of	the	principles	of	inferior	men.

None	of	this	occurs	arbitrarily;	it	is	born	of	the	time.	It	is	the	season	of	spring,	both	in	the	year	and	in
history,	that	is	represented	by	this	hexagram.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	and	earth	unite:	the	image	of	PEACE.
Thus	the	ruler
Divides	and	completes	the	course	of	heaven	and	earth;
He	furthers	and	regulates	the	gifts	of	heaven	and	earth,
And	so	aids	the	people.

Human	activity	must	help	nature	in	times	of	flowering.	Nature	must	be	kept	within	limits,	as	the	earth
limits	the	activities	of	heaven,	in	order	to	regulate	excess.	On	the	other	hand,	nature	must	be	furthered,
as	heaven	furthers	the	gifts	of	the	earth,	in	order	to	make	up	for	deficiencies.	In	this	way	the	blessings	of
nature	benefit	 the	people.	The	Chinese	word	 for	 “aid”	means	 literally	 “being	at	 the	 left	and	 the	 right,”
which	in	turn	derives	from	the	fact	that	the	movement	of	yang	is	thought	of	as	being	toward	the	right	and
that	of	yin	toward	the	left.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	



a)	When	ribbon	grass	is	pulled	up,	the	sod	comes	with	it.
Each	according	to	his	kind.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune	and	success.
b)	 “When	 ribbon	 grass	 is	 pulled	 up….	 Undertakings	 bring	 good	 fortune.”	 The	 will	 is	 directed

outward.
The	three	lines	of	the	lower	trigram	Ch’ien	belong	with	one	another	and	advance	together.	The	lowest

place	suggests	the	idea	of	sod.	The	six	in	the	fourth	place	unites	with	the	nine	at	the	beginning,	therefore
going	forth—“undertakings”	brings	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Bearing	with	the	uncultured	in	gentleness,
Fording	the	river	with	resolution,
Not	neglecting	what	is	distant,
Not	regarding	one’s	companions:
Thus	one	may	manage	to	walk	in	the	middle.
b)	 “Bearing	with	 the	uncultured	 in	gentleness	…	 thus	one	may	manage	 to	walk	 in	 the	middle,”

because	the	light	is	great.
The	trigram	Ch’ien	incloses	K’un,	bears	the	uncultured	in	gentleness.	The	line	must	proceed	resolutely

through	the	river	because	it	is	the	lowest	line	in	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	water.	It	must	step	over	those
that	lie	between,	in	order	to	unite	with	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	Those	far	away	are	symbolized	by	the	six
at	the	top;	the	friends	are	the	two	other	strong	lines	of	Ch’ien.	They	are	not	regarded	because	the	nine	in
the	 second	 place	 unites	 with	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth.	 “Thus	 one	 may	 manage	 to	 walk	 in	 the	 middle,”	 or
according	to	another	explanation,	“Thus	one	obtains	aid	for	walking	in	the	middle,”	that	is,	from	the	six	in
the	fifth	place.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	No	plain	not	followed	by	a	slope.
No	going	not	followed	by	a	return.
He	who	remains	persevering	in	danger
Is	without	blame.
Do	not	complain	about	this	truth;
Enjoy	the	good	fortune	you	still	possess.
b)	“No	going	not	followed	by	a	return”:	this	is	the	boundary	of	heaven	and	earth.

This	line	is	in	the	middle	of	the	hexagram,	on	the	boundary	between	heaven	and	earth,	between	yang
and	yin.	This	suggests	the	idea	of	a	setback.	But	the	line	is	extremely	strong.	Hence	it	should	not	be	sad,
but	only	strong,	enjoying	the	good	fortune	that	still	remains	(the	nuclear	trigram,	Tui,	in	which	this	is	the
middle	line,	means	mouth,	hence	enjoying,	eating).

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	flutters	down,	not	boasting	of	his	wealth,
Together	with	his	neighbor,
Guileless	and	sincere.
b)	“He	flutters	down,	not	boasting	of	his	wealth”:	all	of	them	have	lost	what	is	real.
“Guileless	and	sincere”:	he	desires	it	in	the	depths	of	his	heart.

As	the	three	lower	lines	ascend	together,	so	the	three	upper	ones	sink	down	together,	fluttering.	None
wants	 to	 possess	 wealth	 for	 himself	 alone.	 This	 line	 has	 “lost	 what	 is	 real,”	 that	 is,	 it	 has	 renounced
material	advantage	such	as	would	beckon	if	it	should	egotistically	unite	with	the	nine	at	the	beginning.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	sovereign	I
Gives	his	daughter	in	marriage.
This	brings	blessing
And	supreme	good	fortune.
b)	“This	brings	blessing	and	supreme	good	fortune,”	because	he	is	central	in	carrying	out	what	he

desires.
The	 nuclear	 trigram	 Chên	 means	 the	 entrance	 of	 the	 ruler	 (“God	 comes	 forth	 in	 the	 sign	 of	 the

Arousing”1).	This	line	stands	over	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	the	youngest	daughter,	hence	the	image	of	the
daughter	given	in	marriage	to	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	which	is	lower	in	rank.	Owing	to	its	central
character,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	achieves	the	fulfillment	of	all	its	wishes.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	wall	falls	back	into	the	moat.
Use	no	army	now.
Make	your	commands	known	within	your	own	town.
Perseverance	brings	humiliation.
b)	“The	wall	falls	back	into	the	moat.”	His	plans	fall	into	confusion.

The	earth,	in	the	highest	place,	indicates	the	wall.	The	line,	like	the	other	yin	lines,	tends	downward;
therefore	it	symbolizes	falling	into	the	moat.	K’un	means	mass,	the	army.	The	nuclear	trigram	Tui	(mouth)
suggests	commands.



This	 line	 is	 in	 union	 with	 the	 restless	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place.	 Thus	 it	 is	 drawn	 into	 the	 confusion
prophesied	in	relation	to	the	latter.	But	if	one	keeps	oneself	inwardly	free	and	takes	care	of	those	nearest
to	him,	he	can	guard	against	the	impending	ruin—though	only	in	silence.	In	general,	the	time	fulfills	itself
of	necessity.



12.	P’i	/	Standstill	[Stagnation]

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	six	in	the	second	place	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth.	During	standstill,
those	above	are	out	of	union	with	those	below.	The	saying	associated	with	the	six	in	the	second	place	is:
“Standstill	brings	success.”	The	 line	refers	 to	a	person	who	 takes	refuge	 in	his	virtue	 in	order	 to	avoid
difficulties.	The	saying	associated	with	the	nine	 in	the	fifth	place	 is:	“Standstill	 is	giving	way.”	This	 line
refers	to	someone	who	transforms	standstill	into	peace.	However,	the	six	in	the	second	place	is	the	ruler
having	the	constituting	function	in	the	hexagram,	while	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	is	the	ruler	that	governs
it.

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	remain	forever	united;	hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	STANDSTILL.

This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.	Therefore	the	movements	of	the	trigrams	diverge.
The	 trigram	Ch’ien	 above	withdraws	 always	 farther	 upward,	 and	K’un	 below	 sinks	 farther	 and	 farther
down.	The	two	nuclear	trigrams,	Sun,	gentleness,	and	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	also	characterize	the	hexagram.
These	trigrams	form	the	hexagram	Ku,	WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED	(18),	and	in	the	latter	too
have	the	meaning	of	standstill.	The	hexagram	P’i	is	linked	with	the	seventh	month	(August–September).

Miscellaneous	Notes
The	hexagrams	of	STANDSTILL	and	PEACE	are	opposed	in	their	natures.

THE	JUDGMENT
STANDSTILL.	Evil	people	do	not	further
The	perseverance	of	the	superior	man.
The	great	departs;	the	small	approaches.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“Evil	people	of	the	time	of	STANDSTILL	do	not	further	the	perseverance	of	the	superior	man.	The

great	departs;	the	small	approaches.”
Thus	heaven	and	earth	do	not	unite,	and	all	beings	fail	to	achieve	union.
Upper	and	lower	do	not	unite,	and	in	the	world,	states	go	down	to	ruin.
The	 shadowy	 is	 within,	 the	 light	 without;	 weakness	 is	 within,	 firmness	 without;	 the	 inferior	 is

within,	the	superior	without.	The	way	of	the	inferior	is	waxing,	the	way	of	the	superior	is	waning.
Point	for	point,	these	conditions	are	the	opposite	of	those	in	the	preceding	hexagram.	Although	we	are

dealing	with	cosmic	conditions,	the	cause	is	nevertheless	to	be	sought	in	the	wrong	course	taken	by	man.
It	is	man	who	spoils	conditions—aside,	naturally,	from	the	regular	phenomena	of	decline	occurring	in	the
normal	course	of	life	as	well	as	of	the	year.	When	heaven	and	earth	are	disunited,	life	in	nature	stagnates.
When	those	above	and	those	below	are	disunited,	political	and	social	life	stagnate.	Within,	at	the	center,
there	should	be	light;	instead,	the	dark	is	there,	and	light	is	pushed	to	the	outside.	Man	is	inwardly	weak
and	outwardly	hard;	inferior	men	are	at	the	center	of	government,	and	the	superior	men	are	forced	to	the
periphery.	All	this	indicates	that	the	way	of	the	inferior	man	is	on	the	increase,	while	that	of	the	superior
man	 is	 in	 decrease—just	 as	 the	 dark	 lines	 enter	 the	 hexagram	 from	below	 and	 press	 upward,	 and	 the
strong	lines	withdraw	upward.

THE	IMAGE
Heaven	and	earth	do	not	unite:
The	image	of	STANDSTILL.
Thus	the	superior	man	falls	back	upon	his	inner	worth
In	order	to	escape	the	difficulties.
He	does	not	permit	himself	to	be	honored	with	revenue.

The	way	to	overcome	the	difficulties	of	the	time	of	STANDSTILL	is	indicated	in	the	attributes	of	the	two
primary	trigrams.	K’un	means	frugality,	retrenchment.	The	three	strong	lines	of	the	outer	trigram	Ch’ien,
which	withdraw,	 symbolize	 escape	 from	 all	 the	 difficulties	 that	 arise	 from	 the	 pressing	 forward	 of	 the
inferior	men.	This	withdrawal	also	implies	rejection	of	material	rewards.	While	in	the	preceding	hexagram
the	gifts	of	heaven	and	earth	are	administered	by	the	superior	man,	here	he	stands	completely	aloof.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	When	ribbon	grass	is	pulled	up,	the	sod	comes	with	it.
Each	according	to	his	kind.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune	and	success.
b)	“When	ribbon	grass	is	pulled	up….	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.”	The	will	 is	directed	to

the	ruler.
Here,	taken	singly,	the	yin	lines	are	regarded	not	as	inferior	but	as	superior,	at	a	time	when	the	inferior

element	is	triumphing.	In	conformity	with	the	movement	of	the	two	trigrams,	there	is	no	relationship	of
correspondence	between	the	upper	and	the	 lower	 lines.	Hence	the	three	 lower	 lines	hang	together	 like
ribbon	 grass	 and	 together	 withdraw	 downward,	 in	 order	 to	 remain	 loyal	 to	 the	 prince	 and	 to	 avoid
association	with	the	inferior	men	who	are	advancing.

Six	in	the	second	place:



	
a)	They	bear	and	endure;
This	means	good	fortune	for	inferior	people.
The	standstill	serves	to	help	the	great	man	to	attain	success.
b)	“The	standstill	serves	to	help	the	great	man	to	attain	success.”	He	does	not	confuse	the	masses.

The	inferior	people	ingratiate	themselves	with	the	ruler,	the	nine	in	“the	fifth	place,	which	is	fortunate
for	them,	for	it	might	enable	them	to	improve	themselves.	But	in	order	not	to	confuse	the	multitude	who
think	as	he	does,	the	superior	man	does	not	enter	into	any	such	incorrect,	sycophantic	relationship.

Here	as	in	the	preceding	hexagram,	forbearance	is	meant.	But	in	the	latter	a	superior	man	bears	with
an	inferior,	while	here	we	have	servile	support	of	influential	persons	who	are	rich	and	powerful.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	They	bear	shame.
b)	“They	bear	shame”	because	the	place	is	not	the	right	one.

The	third	line	is	weak	in	the	strong	place	of	transition.	This	is	an	incorrect	place	for	it,	hence	the	idea
of	humiliation.	Because	 the	 line	 is	at	 the	 top	of	 the	 lower	 trigram	K’un,	 it	 is	 the	one	 that	supports	and
bears	 with	 the	 lower	 ones.	 Here	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 change	 for	 the	 better	 is	 indicated,	 just	 as	 in	 the
preceding	hexagram	the	beginning	of	failure	is	indicated	in	the	nine	in	the	third	place.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	who	acts	at	the	command	of	the	highest
Remains	without	blame.
Those	of	like	mind	partake	of	the	blessing.
b)	“He	who	acts	at	the	command	of	the	highest	remains	without	blame.”	What	is	willed	is	done.

The	mid-point	of	the	stagnation	has	been	passed.	Order	is	gradually	being	re-established.	This	line	is
strong	in	a	yielding	place,	therefore	not	too	yielding.	It	stands	in	the	minister’s	place,	hence	acts	under
orders	 from	 above,	 and	 as	 a	 result	 remains	 free	 of	 blame.	Here	 again,	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 hexagram,
minister	and	ruler	are	united.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Standstill	is	giving	way.
Good	fortune	for	the	great	man.
“What	if	it	should	fail,	what	if	it	should	fail?”
In	this	way	he	ties	it	to	a	cluster	of	mulberry	shoots.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	great	man	consists	in	the	fact	that	the	place	is	correct	and	appropriate.

The	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	ruler,	and	since	the	line	has	all	the	necessary	good	qualities,	it	brings	the
period	 of	 stagnation	 to	 an	 end.	But	 its	work	 is	 not	 yet	 finished;	 hence	 the	 anxious	 concern	 lest	 things
should	still	go	wrong.	This	anxiety	is	a	good	thing.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	standstill	comes	to	an	end.
First	standstill,	then	good	fortune.
b)	When	the	standstill	comes	to	an	end,	it	reverses.
One	should	not	wish	to	make	it	permanent.

Here	 the	 end	 is	 reached.	With	 this,	 change	 sets	 in	 actually.	 A	 strong	 line	 stands	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the
hexagram	 of	 STANDSTILL,	 which	 indicates	 that	 the	 change	 to	 the	 opposite	 is	 at	 hand.	 Here	 too	 a
parallelism—i.e.,	with	the	top	line	of	the	preceding	hexagram—is	to	be	noted.



13.	T’ung	Jên	/	Fellowship	with	Men

The	 rulers	 of	 the	hexagram	are	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	and	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 The	 six	 in	 the
second	place,	as	the	only	yin	line,	is	able	to	maintain	fellowship	with	all	the	yang	lines,	and	the	nine	in	the
fifth	place	corresponds	with	 it.	Therefore	 the	Commentary	on	 the	Decision	says:	 “The	yielding	 finds	 its
place,	finds	the	middle,	and	the	Creative	corresponds	with	it.”

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	be	at	a	standstill	forever.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	FELLOWSIDP	WITH

MEN.
Miscellaneous	Notes
Fellowship	with	men	finds	love.

The	movement	of	both	primary	trigrams	 is	upward,	hence	parallel.	 In	 the	same	way	the	two	nuclear
trigrams,	 Ch’ien	 and	 Sun,	 which	 together	 form	 the	 hexagram	 of	 COMING	 TO	 MEET	 (44)	 indicate
fellowship.	 The	 lower	 primary	 trigram	 is	 Li,	 the	 sun,	 fire.	 Ch’ien,	 heaven,	 becomes	 especially	 brilliant
because	fire	is	given	to	it.

THE	JUDGMENT
FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN	in	the	open.
Success.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
The	perseverance	of	the	superior	man	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
FELLOWSHIP	 WITH	 MEN.	 The	 yielding	 finds	 its	 place,	 finds	 the	 middle,	 and	 the	 Creative

corresponds	with	it:	this	means	fellowship	with	men.
FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN	means:	“Fellowship	with	men	in	the	open.	Success.	It	furthers	one	to

cross	the	great	water.”
The	Creative	 acts.	Order	 and	 clarity,	 in	 combination	with	 strength;	 central,	 correct,	 and	 in	 the

relationship	of	correspondence:	this	is	the	correctness	of	the	superior	man.	Only	the	superior	man	is
able	to	unite	the	wills	of	all	under	heaven.
The	second	line	is	the	yielding	element	that	finds	its	place	in	the	middle	and	with	which	the	Creative

corresponds.	It	is	to	be	taken	as	the	representative	of	the	trigram	K’un,	which	has	established	itself	in	the
second	place	of	Ch’ien.	Therefore	this	line	accords	with	the	nature	of	the	earth	and	of	the	official.
The	phrase	“fellowship	with	men	in	the	open”	is	also	represented	by	this	line,	which	stands	in	the	place

of	 the	 field	 (cf.	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 in	 hexagram	 1,	 THE	 CREATIVE).	 The	 fellowship	 here	 is
brought	about	by	the	official	(not	by	the	ruler),	by	virtue	of	his	character,	not	by	virtue	of	the	authority	of
his	position.	The	kind	of	character	capable	of	bringing	this	about	is	delineated	in	the	attributes	of	the	two
primary	 trigrams.	 Order	 and	 clarity	 are	 attributes	 of	 Li,	 and	 strength	 characterizes	 Ch’ien.	 First
knowledge,	then	strength—this	is	the	road	to	culture.
The	superior	man,	even	when	placed	where	he	serves,	fills	this	position	correctly	and	unselfishly	and

finds	the	support	he	needs	in	his	ruler,	the	representative	of	the	heavenly	principle.	The	will	of	men	under
heaven	is	represented	by	Li	(which	means	enlightened	will)	beneath	Ch’ien,	heaven.
Crossing	of	the	great	water	is	indicated	by	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	which	means	wood	and	gives	rise

to	the	idea	of	a	ship.
THE	IMAGE
Heaven	together	with	fire:
The	image	of	FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN.
Thus	the	superior	man	organizes	the	clans
And	makes	distinctions	between	things.

Fire	 has	 the	 same	 nature	 as	 heaven,	 to	 which	 it	 flames	 up.	 It	 is	 strengthened	 in	 this	 trend	 by	 the
nuclear	trigram	Sun,	wind.	The	wind,	which	blows	everywhere,	also	suggests	union	and	fellowship.	The
same	thought	is	expressed	by	the	sun	in	the	sky,	which	shines	upon	all	things	equally.
Yet	there	is	one	thing	in	this	fellowship	that	the	superior	man	must	not	overlook.	He	must	not	degrade

himself.	Hence	 the	necessity	 of	 organization	and	differentiation,	which	 is	 suggested	by	 the	attribute	of
order	in	the	lower	trigram	Li.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Fellowship	with	men	at	the	gate.
No	blame.
b)	Going	out	of	the	gate	for	fellowship	with	men—who	would	find	anything	to	blame	in	this?

This	line	at	the	beginning	is	light,	strong	without	egotism.	The	six	in	the	second	place	is	a	divided	line,
open	 in	 the	 center,	 the	 image	 of	 a	 door.	 The	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning,	 strong	 in	 a	 strong	 place,	 seeks
fellowship,	and	without	self-interest	or	egotism	unites	with	the	six	 in	the	second	place,	which	 in	turn	 is
central	and	correct,	so	that	no	blame	attaches	to	such	a	union.	Even	the	two	envious	lines	in	the	third	and



the	fourth	place	cannot	find	anything	wrong	in	it.
Six	in	the	second	place:

	
a)	Fellowship	with	men	in	the	clan.
Humiliation.
b)	“Fellowship	with	men	in	the	clan”	is	the	way	to	humiliation.

Clan	means	faction,	fellowship	on	the	basis	of	similarity	of	kind.	In	the	sequence	of	the	trigrams	in	the
Inner-World	 Arrangement,	 Li	 is	 in	 the	 south,	 the	 place	 of	 Ch’ien	 in	 the	 Primal	 Arrangement.	 Through
movement,	the	present	line	becomes	a	nine,	and	Li	becomes	Ch’ien.	These	are	relationships	of	an	intimate
character.	But	 since	 the	meaning	of	 the	hexagram	 favors	open	 relations,	 the	 fellowship	 represented	by
this	line	is	too	limited	and	therefore	humiliating.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	He	hides	weapons	in	the	thicket;
He	climbs	the	high	hill	in	front	of	it.
For	three	years	he	does	not	rise	up.
b)	“He	hides	weapons	in	the	thicket”	because	he	had	a	hard	man	as	opponent.
“For	three	years	he	does	not	rise	up.”	How	could	it	be	done?

The	 trigram	Li	means	weapons,	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	Sun	means	 to	 hide,	 also	wood,	 thicket.	 Sun,	 in
changing,	 becomes	 Kên,	 mountain,	 hence	 the	 image	 of	 a	 high	 hill	 in	 front.	 This	 line	 is	 hard	 and	 not
central.	It	means	a	rough	man	who	seeks	fellowship	with	the	six	in	the	second	place	on	the	basis	of	the
relation	 of	 holding	 together.	 But	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place	 is	 correct	 and	 cultivates	 appropriate
fellowship	with	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	The	present	line	tries	to	prevent	this,	but	its	strength	is	not	a
match	for	that	of	its	opponent,	and	so	it	resorts	to	cunning.	It	peeps	out	at	its	opponent	but	does	not	dare
to	come	forth.	“Three	years”	is	probably	suggested	by	the	three	lines	of	Ch’ien.	The	place	is	the	lowest	in
the	nuclear	trigram	Ch’ien.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	climbs	up	on	his	wall;	he	cannot	attack.
Good	fortune.
b)	 “He	 climbs	 up	 on	 his	 wall.”	 The	 situation	 means	 that	 he	 can	 do	 nothing.	 His	 good	 fortune

consists	in	the	fact	that	he	gets	into	trouble	and	therefore	returns	to	lawful	ways.
This	line	also	seeks	the	fellowship	of	the	six	in	the	second	place.	But	it	is	without,	and	the	second	line

is	within.	The	second	line	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	and
holds	 together	with	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place.	Hence	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place	 forms	 the	 high	wall
confronting	 this	 fourth	 line,	 protecting	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place	 from	 it.	 If	 the	 fourth	 line	 tries	 to
contend	with	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	it	finds	that	it	is	in	no	position	to	do	so,	because	of	its	weak	and
incorrect	place.	But	since	this	yielding	place	softens	the	hardness	of	the	line,	it	is	moved	by	the	exigencies
of	the	situation	to	renunciation	and	a	return	to	the	right	way.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Men	bound	in	fellowship	first	weep	and	lament,
But	afterward	they	laugh.
After	great	struggles	they	succeed	in	meeting.
b)	The	beginning	of	the	men	bound	in	fellowship	is	central	and	straight.
“After	great	struggles	they	succeed	in	meeting,”	that	is,	they	are	victorious.

The	fifth	and	the	second	line	are	in	a	correct,	direct	relationship	of	correspondence.	At	first	the	third
and	 the	 fourth	 line	 prevent	 their	 union	 and	 they	 are	 sad,	 but	 being	 central	 and	 correct,	 they	 will
eventually	unite.	The	lower	trigram	Li	means	weapons;	the	upper,	Ch’ien,	advances	vigorously	to	meet	it.
This	points	to	a	victory	of	great	armies.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Fellowship	with	men	in	the	meadow.
No	remorse.
b)	“Fellowship	with	men	in	the	meadow.”	The	will	is	not	yet	satisfied.

Ch’ien	 means	 the	 meadow	 before	 the	 town.	 The	 upper	 line	 is	 outside	 the	 hexagram,	 and	 this	 also
indicates	the	meadow.	Beyond	the	meadow	is	the	open	country.	Fellowship	in	the	meadow,	then,	still	falls
short	of	the	ultimate	ideal.	The	will	to	fellowship	in	the	open,	which	brings	success,	is	not	yet	satisfied.
NOTE.	This	hexagram	embodies	the	ideal	of	the	universal	brotherhood	of	man,	which,	however,	is	not

yet	attained.	 Its	demand	thus	points	beyond	all	of	 the	situations	of	 fellowship	shown	in	the	hexagram—
none	of	these	is	wholly	satisfactory.	None	of	the	individual	lines	attains	the	ideal.	All	seek	fellowship	on
the	 basis	 of	 narrower	 relationships.	 For	 this	 reason,	 none	 of	 them	 attains	 the	 great	 success	 that	 the
hexagram	as	a	whole	envisions.



14.	Ta	Yu	/	Posession	in	Great	Measure

The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 This	 line	 is	 empty	 and	 central,	 occupies	 an
honored	place,	and	is	capable	of	possessing	all	the	yang	lines.	Therefore	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on
the	 Decision:	 “The	 yielding	 receives	 the	 honored	 place	 in	 the	 great	 middle,	 and	 upper	 and	 lower
correspond	with	it.”

The	Sequence
Through	FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN	 things	are	 sure	 to	 fall	 to	one’s	 lot.	Hence	 there	 follows	 the

hexagram	of	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE.
Miscellaneous	Notes
POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE	indicates	the	mass.

The	two	primary	trigrams,	Ch’ien	and	Li,	are	both	ascending,	and	so	are	the	nuclear	trigrams,	Ch’ien
and	Tui.	All	these	circumstances	are	extremely	favorable.	This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding
one.	It	is	more	favorable	than	FELLOWSHIP	WITH	MEN,	because	here	the	ruler	is	at	the	same	time	in	the
place	of	authority,	the	fifth	place.

THE	JUDGMENT
POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE.
Supreme	success.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE:	the	yielding	receives	the	honored	place	in	the	great	middle,

and	upper	and	lower	correspond	with	it.	This	is	called	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE.
His	character	is	firm	and	strong,	ordered	and	clear;	it	finds	correspondence	in	heaven	and	moves

with	the	time;	hence	the	words,	“Supreme	success.”
The	yielding	element	that	receives	the	honored	position	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	As	contrasted	with

the	six	 in	 the	second	place	 in	 the	preceding	hexagram,	 this	 line	occupies	 the	“great”	middle;	 from	this
vantage,	possession	of	 the	five	strong	 lines	can	be	organized	much	better.	The	official	can	 indeed	unite
people,	but	only	the	prince	can	possess	them.	In	the	preceding	hexagram	the	strong	lines	stand	only	in
indirect	 relationship	 to	 the	 prince;	 here	 they	 are	 directly	 related.	 Thus	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 hexagram
gives	rise	to	the	name.

The	 words	 of	 the	 Judgment	 are	 interpreted	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 the	 attributes	 and	 structure	 of	 the
hexagram.	Within	dwell	the	firmness	and	power	of	Ch’ien;	to	the	outside,	the	clear	and	ordered	form	of	Li
appears.	The	six	in	the	fifth	place,	the	ruler	to	whom	everything	conforms,	modestly	conforms	on	his	part
with	the	nine	in	the	second	place	and	finds	correspondence	there	in	the	center	of	heaven.	Ch’ien,	being
doubled	 (lower	 primary	 trigram	 and	 lower	 nuclear	 trigram),	 indicates	 the	 flow	 of	 time.	 The	 successful
execution	of	measures	demands	that	firm	decision	dwell	within	the	mind,	while	the	method	of	execution
must	be	ordered	and	clear.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	in	heaven	above:
The	image	of	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE.
Thus	the	superior	man	curbs	evil	and	furthers	good,
And	thereby	obeys	the	benevolent	will	of	heaven.

The	 sun	 in	 heaven,	 which	 shines	 upon	 everything,	 is	 the	 image	 of	 possession	 in	 great	 measure.
Suppression	 of	 evil	 is	 indicated	 by	 the	 trigram	Ch’ien,	 the	 trigram	 that	metes	 out	 judgment,	 and	 that
fights	the	evil	in	living	beings.	Furthering	of	the	good	is	indicated	by	the	trigram	Li,	which	clarifies	and
orders	everything.	Both	are	the	decree	of	benevolent	heaven	(Ch’ien),	to	which	the	superior	man	devotes
himself	obediently	(Li	means	devotion).

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	No	relationship	with	what	is	harmful;
There	is	no	blame	in	this.
If	one	remains	conscious	of	difficulty,
One	remains	without	blame.
b)	If	the	nine	at	the	beginning	in	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE	has	no	relationships,	this	is

harmful.
The	upper	trigram	Li	means	weapons	and	therefore	something	harmful.	This	line	is	still	far	away	from

Li,	 hence	 there	 is	no	 relationship	with	 the	 latter.	Difficulties	 exist,	 because	great	possession	 in	 a	 lowly
place	attracts	danger.	Therefore	caution	 is	 fitting.	However,	since	the	 line	 is	strong,	 it	may	be	assumed
that	it	remains	free	of	blame.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	A	big	wagon	for	loading.
One	may	undertake	something.



No	blame.
b)	“A	big	wagon	for	loading.”	Accumulating	in	the	middle;	thus	no	harm	results.

Ch’ien	symbolizes	a	wheel	and	a	big	wagon.	The	load	to	be	placed	in	the	wagon	consists	of	the	three
lines	 of	 the	 trigram.	Since	Ch’ien	 implies	 vigorous	movement,	 undertakings	 are	 indicated.	 The	present
line	is	firm	and	central	and	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	therefore
everything	is	favorable.	Ordinarily,	accumulation	of	treasure	brings	disaster,	but	here	accumulating	in	the
middle	 is	 correct	 and	central	 and	brings	no	harm.	 It	 is	 not	 earthly	but	heavenly	 treasure	 that	 is	 being
accumulated.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	A	prince	offers	it	to	the	Son	of	Heaven.
A	petty	man	cannot	do	this.
b)	“A	prince	offers	it	to	the	Son	of	Heaven.”	A	petty	man	harms	himself.

This	 line	 is	strong	and	correct	and	has	relationships	above.	Being	at	 the	 top	of	 the	 lower	 trigram,	 it
represents	the	prince.	Since	it	belongs	to	the	trigram	Ch’ien	and	to	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	it	is	ready	to
sacrifice.	 A	 small-minded	man	would	 give	merely	 from	 a	 desire	 for	 gain,	 and	 this	would	 result	 only	 in
harm.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	makes	a	difference
Between	himself	and	his	neighbor.
No	blame.
b)	 “He	 makes	 a	 difference	 between	 himself	 and	 his	 neighbor.	 No	 blame.”	 He	 is	 clear,

discriminating,	and	intelligent.
The	six	 in	 the	 fifth	place	has	possession	of	 the	 five	yang	 lines.	This	 fourth	 line	 is	 in	 the	place	of	 the

minister;	 hence	 it	might	 ignore	 the	difference	between	 itself	 and	 the	 ruler,	 and	 arrogate	 possession	 to
itself.	But	since	it	is	strong	in	a	weak	place,	it	is	too	modest	to	do	this,	and	since	it	is	at	the	beginning	of
Li,	it	has	Li’s	attribute	of	clear	discrimination,	which	prevents	any	such	confusion	of	“mine”	and	“thine.”

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	He	whose	truth	is	accessible,	yet	dignified,
Has	good	fortune.
b)	“He	whose	truth	is	accessible”:	by	his	trustworthiness	he	kindles	the	will	of	others.	The	good

fortune	of	his	dignity	comes	from	the	fact	that	he	acts	easily,	without	prearrangements.
The	six	 in	the	fifth	place	 is	 in	the	place	of	honor.	 It	 is	modest	and	true,	therefore	 it	moves	the	other

lines	to	confidence.	Owing	to	its	position,	however,	 it	can	also	impress	by	its	dignity.	This	it	does	easily,
however,	and	without	external	prearrangements,	because	it	holds	the	great	middle.	Therefore	it	arouses
no	unpleasant	feelings.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	is	blessed	by	heaven.
Good	fortune.
Nothing	that	does	not	further.
b)	The	place	at	the	top	of	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE	has	good	fortune.	This	is	because	it

is	blessed	by	heaven.
The	five	yang	lines	are	all	in	the	possession	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	Even	the	top	line	submits	to	it.

Ch’ien	 and	 Li	 are	 both	 heavenly	 in	 nature,	 therefore	 it	 is	 said	 that	 heaven	 blesses	 this	 line.	 In	 the
commentary	on	this	line,	as	well	as	in	that	on	the	first	line	of	the	hexagram,	special	mention	is	made	of
the	 position,	 in	 order	 to	 emphasize	 the	 end	 and	 the	 beginning.	 For	 this	 hexagram	 is	 organized	 so
favorably	 that	 the	 movement	 setting	 in	 at	 the	 beginning	 does	 not	 at	 the	 close	 come	 to	 standstill	 nor
change	to	its	opposite,	but	ends	harmoniously.



15.	Ch’ien	/	Modesty

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	third	place.	It	is	the	only	light	line	in	the	hexagram;	it	is	in
its	proper	place	and	stands	in	the	lower	trigram.	This	is	the	symbol	of	modesty,	therefore	the	judgment	on
this	line	is	the	same	as	that	on	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.	The	commentary	often	attributes	misfortune	to
third	lines,	but	this	one	is	very	favorable.

The	Sequence
He	who	possesses	something	great	must	not	make	it	too	full;	hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of

MODESTY.
Miscellaneous	Notes
Things	are	easy	for	the	modest	person.

The	movement	of	both	primary	trigrams	is	downward,	but	the	sinking	tendency	of	the	upper	trigram	is
stronger	 than	 that	of	 the	 lower,	 and	 in	 this	way	 the	connection	between	 the	 two	 remains	assured.	The
lower	nuclear	trigram	sinks,	while	the	upper	rises.

Appended	Judgments
MODESTY	 shows	 the	 handle	 of	 character.	MODESTY	 gives	 honor	 and	 shines	 forth.	MODESTY

serves	to	regulate	the	mores.
Good	 character	has	modesty	 for	 a	 handle;	 by	means	 of	 it	 good	 character	 can	be	grasped	and	made

one’s	 own.	Modesty	 is	 ready	 to	 honor	 others,	 and	 in	 so	 doing	 shows	 itself	 at	 its	 best.	Modesty	 is	 the
attitude	of	mind	that	underlies	sincere	observance	of	the	mores.

THE	JUDGMENT
MODESTY	creates	success.
The	superior	man	carries	things	through.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
MODESTY	 creates	 success,	 for	 it	 is	 the	 way	 of	 heaven	 to	 shed	 its	 influence	 downward	 and	 to

create	light	and	radiance.	It	is	the	way	of	the	earth	to	be	lowly	and	to	go	upward.
It	is	the	way	of	heaven	to	make	empty	what	is	full	and	to	give	increase	to	what	is	modest.	It	is	the

way	of	the	earth	to	change	the	full	and	to	augment	the	modest.	Spirits	and	gods	bring	harm	to	what
is,	full	and	prosper	what	is	modest.	It	is	the	way	of	men	to	hate	fullness	and	to	love	the	modest.
Modesty	 that	 is	honored	spreads	radiance.	Modesty	 that	 is	 lowly	cannot	be	 ignored.	This	 is	 the

end	attained	by	the	superior	man.
Here	 the	structure	of	 the	hexagram	 is	used	 to	explain	 the	saying	 that	modesty	creates	success.	The

nine	in	the	third	place	is	the	representative	of	the	yang	force,	which	has	sunk	down.	It	brings	light	and
radiance,	attributes	of	the	trigram	Kên,	the	mountain.	The	upper	trigram	K’un	shows	the	earth	as	having
moved	upward	(the	nuclear	trigram	Chên	has	a	rising	movement).	The	law	governing	the	abasing	of	the
proud	and	the	elevation	of	the	modest	is	set	forth	in	four	ways:	(1)	in	heaven:	when	the	sun	reaches	the
zenith,	it	begins	to	decline;	when	the	moon	is	full,	it	wanes;	when	dark,	it	begins	to	wax;	(2)	on	earth:	high
mountains	become	valleys,	valleys	become	hills;	water	 turns	 toward	the	heights	and	wears	 them	down;
water	turns	toward	depth	and	fills	it	up	(the	lower	nuclear	trigram	is	K’an,	water);	(3)	in	the	effect	of	the
forces	of	fate:	powerful	families	draw	down	destruction	upon	themselves,	modest	ones	become	great;	(4)
among	men:	arrogance	brings	dislike	in	its	train,	modesty	wins	love.
The	 ultimate	 cause	 is	 never	 the	 outside	 world,	 which	moreover	 reacts	 according	 to	 fixed	 laws,	 but

rather	man	himself.	For	according	to	his	conduct	he	draws	upon	himself	good	or	evil	influences.	The	way
to	expansion	leads	through	contraction.

THE	IMAGE
Within	the	earth,	a	mountain:
The	image	of	MODESTY.
Thus	the	superior	man	reduces	that	which	is	too	much,
And	augments	that	which	is	too	little.
He	weighs	things	and	makes	them	equal.

To	bring	about	the	conditions	set	forth	by	the	hexagram,	the	superior	man	moves	in	harmony	with	the
increasing	and	decreasing	movements	of	 the	nuclear	 trigrams.	Where	 the	 lowly	stands	 (K’un,	earth)	he
ascends	 (Chên)	 and	augments	what	 is	 too	 little.	Conversely,	where	 the	 lofty	 stands	 (Kên,	mountain)	he
descends	(K’an).	Thus	he	equalizes	things.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	A	superior	man	modest	about	his	modesty
May	cross	the	great	water.
Good	fortune.
b)	“A	superior	man	modest	about	his	modesty”	is	lowly	in	order	to	guard	himself	well.

Twofold	modesty	is	indicated	by	the	doubly	yielding	character	of	the	line	(a	yielding	line	in	a	yielding1
place).	Crossing	of	 the	great	water	 is	 indicated	by	 the	 lower	nuclear	 trigram,	K’an,	 situated	 in	 front	of



[above]	the	first	line.	Here	is	that	modesty	in	a	lowly	place	which	cannot	be	ignored.
Six	in	the	second	place:

	
a)	Modesty	that	comes	to	expression.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“Modesty	that	comes	to	expression.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.”	He	has	it	in	the	depths

of	his	heart.
The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	who	 sets	 the	 tone,	 is	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place.	 The	 second	 line	 has	 a

relationship	of	holding	together	with	the	ruler,	therefore	it	responds	to	this	tone,	that	is,	expresses	itself.
The	line	is	central,	hence	it	has	modesty	at	the	center,	in	the	heart.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	A	superior	man	of	modesty	and	merit
Carries	things	to	conclusion.
Good	fortune.
b)	“A	superior	man	of	modesty	and	merit”:	all	the	people	obey	him.

Kên,	mountain,	is	the	trigram	in	which	end	and	beginning	meet.	This	line	is	at	the	top	of	Kên,	and	from
this	comes	the	 idea	of	effort	 leading	to	achievement.	The	three	upper	 lines	belong	to	 the	trigram	K’un,
which	means	 the	masses	and	devotion.	The	yang	 line	 in	 the	 third	place	 is	 the	 third	 line	of	 the	 trigram
Ch’ien,	the	Creative,	distinguished	likewise	by	indefatigable	effort.	The	Master	said:
When	a	man	does	not	boast	of	his	efforts	and	does	not	count	his	merits	a	virtue,	he	is	a	man	of	great

parts.	It	means	that	for	all	his	merits	he	subordinates	himself	to	others.	Noble	of	nature,	reverent	in	his
conduct,	the	modest	man	is	full	of	merit,	and	therefore	he	is	able	to	maintain	his	position.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Nothing	that	would	not	further	modesty
In	movement.
b)	“Nothing	that	would	not	further	modesty	in	movement.”	He	does	not	overstep	the	rule.

This	line	is	in	a	yielding	place,	at	the	very	bottom	of	the	trigram	K’un,	whose	attribute	is	devotion;	it
mediates	between	the	nine	in	the	third	place	and	the	six	in	the	fifth.	It	stands	in	the	center	of	the	nuclear
trigram	Chên,	movement,	hence	the	idea	of	movement	(literally,	“beckoning”).

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	No	boasting	of	wealth	before	one’s	neighbor.
It	is	favorable	to	attack	with	force.
Nothing	that	would	not	further.
b)	“It	is	favorable	to	attack	with	force”	in	order	to	chastise	the	disobedient.

This	 line	 is	 central,	 in	 the	 place	 of	 honor,	 yet	 yielding.	 It	 combines	 all	 the	 virtues	 of	 the	 ruler.	 It	 is
empty,	hence	not	boastful	of	its	wealth.	It	is	in	the	center	of	the	trigram	K’un,	signifying	the	masses,	above
the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	danger—hence	the	idea	of	chastisement.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Modesty	that	comes	to	expression.
It	is	favorable	to	set	armies	marching
To	chastise	one’s	own	city	and	one’s	country.
b)	 “Modesty	 that	 comes	 to	 expression.”	 The	 purpose	 is	 not	 yet	 attained.	 One	 may	 set	 armies

marching,	in	order	to	chastise	one’s	own	city	and	one’s	country.
This	 line	 stands	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	hexagram,	 the	nine	 in	 the

third	place;	hence,	 for	 reasons	analogous	 to	 those	obtaining	 in	 the	case	of	 the	 six	 in	 the	second	place,
“modesty	 that	 comes	 to	 expression.”	 K’un,	 the	 upper	 primary	 trigram,	 and	 K’an,	 the	 lower	 nuclear
trigram,	together	make	up	the	hexagram	Shih,	THE	ARMY.	The	trigram	K’un	also	indicates	the	city,	and
the	country.	The	purpose	is	not	yet	achieved	because	the	line	is	very	far	away	from	the	nine	in	the	third
place	 toward	 which	 it	 strives;	 hence	 chastisement	 by	 means	 of	 armies,	 in	 order	 that	 the	 two	may	 be
united.



16.	Yü	/	Enthusiasm

The	ruler	of	 the	hexagram	 is	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fourth	place.	 It	 is	 the	only	 light	 line,	and	stands	 in	 the
place	 of	 the	minister.	 This	 gives	 the	 hexagram	 the	meaning	 of	 enthusiasm.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 said	 in	 the
Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	firm	finds	correspondence,	and	its	will	is	done.”

The	Sequence
When	one	possesses	something	great	and	is	modest,	there	is	sure	to	be	enthusiasm.	Hence	there

follows	the	hexagram	of	ENTHUSIASM.
Miscellaneous	Notes
ENTHUSIASM	leads	to	inertia.
Appended	Judgments
The	heroes	 of	 old	 introduced	double	 gates	 and	night	watchmen	with	 clappers,	 in	 order	 to	 deal

with	robbers.	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	ENTHUSIASM.
Yü	means	 preparation	 as	 well	 as	 enthusiasm.	 The	 upper	 trigram	 is	movement	 (Chên),	 and	 also	 the

sound	of	thunder:	this	suggests	the	image	of	the	night	watchman	making	his	rounds	with	a	clapper	and
encountering	danger	(nuclear	trigram	K’an).	The	lower	nuclear	trigram	Kên	means	a	closed	door.
The	 two	 trigrams	 move	 in	 opposite	 directions.	 Thunder	 moves	 upward,	 the	 earth	 sinks	 down.

Nevertheless,	since	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	K’an	indicates	downward	movement,	while	the	lower,	Kên,
is	motionless,	 there	 is	 a	 certain	 coherence	 of	 structure.	However,	 the	 hexagram	 is	 not	 as	 favorable	 in
outlook	as	the	preceding	one,	of	which	it	is	the	inverse.

THE	JUDGMENT
ENTHUSIASM.	It	furthers	one	to	install	helpers
And	to	set	armies	marching.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
ENTHUSIASM.	The	firm	finds	correspondence,	and	its	will	is	done.	Devotion	to	movement:	this	is

ENTHUSIASM.
Because	ENTHUSIASM	shows	devotion	to	movement,	heaven	and	earth	are	at	its	side.	How	much

the	more	then	is	it	possible	to	install	helpers	and	set	armies	marching!
Heaven	and	earth	move	with	devotion;	therefore	sun	and	moon	do	not	swerve	from	their	courses,

and	the	four	seasons	do	not	err.
The	holy	man	moves	with	devotion;	therefore	fines	and	punishments	become	just,	and	the	people

obey.	Great	indeed	is	the	meaning	of	the	time	of	ENTHUSIASM.
The	trigram	K’un	means	mass,	hence	army.	Chên,	the	upper	trigram,	is	the	eldest	son,	the	leader	of	the

masses,	hence	 the	 idea	of	 the	 installment	of	helpers	 (feudal	 lords)	 and	of	 the	marching	of	 armies.	The
commander	of	the	army,	whose	will	awakens	enthusiasm	and	spurs	to	movement	those	devoted	to	him,	is
the	 nine	 in	 the	 fourth	 place,	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram.	 The	 secret	 of	 all	 natural	 and	 human	 law	 is
movement	that	meets	with	devotion.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	comes	resounding	out	of	the	earth:
The	image	of	ENTHUSIASM.
Thus	the	ancient	kings	made	music
In	order	to	honor	merit,
And	offered	it	with	splendor
To	the	Supreme	Deity,
Inviting	their	ancestors	to	be	present.

Chên	is	the	sound	of	the	thunder	that	accompanies	the	movements	of	reawakening	life.	This	sound	is
the	prototype	of	music.	Furthermore,	Chên	is	the	trigram	in	which	God	comes	forth,	hence	the	idea	of	the
Supreme	Deity.	The	nuclear	trigram	Kên	is	a	door,	and	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an	means	something	deeply
mysterious;	this	leads	to	the	idea	of	the	temple	of	the	ancestors.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Enthusiasm	that	expresses	itself
Brings	misfortune.
b)	The	six	at	 the	beginning	expresses	 its	enthusiasm;	 this	 leads	 to	 the	misfortune	of	having	the

will	obstructed.
This	line	is	analogous	to	the	six	at	the	top	in	the	preceding	hexagram.	Consequently	the	idea	of	self-

expression	 appears	 here	 for	 the	 same	 reason	 as	 it	 does	 there,	 namely,	 because	 of	 the	 relationship	 of
correspondence	to	the	strong	ruler	of	the	hexagram.	The	line	at	the	beginning	is	weak,	incorrect,	isolated,
and	instead	of	being	cautious,	expresses	its	enthusiasm.	This	is	certain	to	lead	to	misfortune.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Firm	as	a	rock.	Not	a	whole	day.



Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“Not	a	whole	day.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune,”	because	it	is	central	and	correct.

This	line	is	in	the	lowest	place	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain,	hence	the	comparison	with	a	rock.
The	movement	of	the	line	is	directed	downward	rather	than	upward,	hence	its	readiness	to	withdraw	at
any	 time.	 This	 comes	 from	 its	 prudence—indicated	 by	 its	 central	 and	 correct	 position—in	 the	 time	 of
ENTHUSIASM.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Enthusiasm	that	looks	upward	creates	remorse.
Hesitation	brings	remorse.
b)	“Enthusiasm	that	looks	upward	creates	remorse,”	because	the	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.

This	 is	 a	weak	 line	 in	 a	 strong	place,	 and	moreover	 in	 the	place	 of	 transition.	 It	 is	 attracted	by	 the
strong	line	in	the	fourth	place,	toward	which	it	looks	up	with	enthusiasm,	because	the	relationship	is	that
of	holding	together	with	it.	Thereby,	however,	it	loses	its	independence,	which	is	not	a	good	thing.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	source	of	enthusiasm.
He	achieves	great	things.
Doubt	not.
You	gather	friends	around	you
As	a	hair	clasp	gathers	the	hair.
b)	“The	source	of	enthusiasm.	He	achieves	great	things.”	His	will	is	done	in	great	things.

This	 line	 is	at	the	beginning	of	the	trigram	Chên,	movement,	which	strives	upward;	 it	 is	at	the	same
time	 the	 only	 yang	 line	 in	 the	 hexagram,	 and	 all	 the	 others	 conform	 to	 it.	 Hence	 it	 is	 the	 source	 of
enthusiasm.	The	five	yin	 lines	represent	the	great	thing	that	 is	attained.	The	excess	of	dark	lines	might
give	rise	to	a	doubt,	and	doubt	might	also	be	occasioned	by	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	in	which	this	line
has	the	middle	place.	But	the	five	yin	lines	are	good	friends	of	the	yang	line;	it	unites	them	just	as	a	hair
clasp	holds	the	hair	together.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Persistently	ill,	and	still	does	not	die.
b)	The	persistent	illness	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	is	due	to	the	fact	that	it	rests	upon	a	hard	line.

That	it	nevertheless	does	not	die	is	due	to	the	fact	that	the	middle	has	not	yet	been	passed.
This	place	is	actually	that	of	the	ruler.	But	since	the	firm	line,	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place,	as	the	source

of	enthusiasm,	unites	all	those	around	it,	the	fifth	place	is	deprived	of	enthusiasm.	The	fact	that	the	line	is
at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	which	suggests	heart	disease,	accounts	for	the	idea	that	the	person
represented	is	chronically	ill.	But	since	his	central	position	keeps	him	from	becoming	desperate	because
of	this,	he	lives	on	and	on.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Deluded	enthusiasm.
But	if	after	completion	one	changes,
There	is	no	blame.
b)	Deluded	enthusiasm	in	a	high	place:	how	could	this	last?

A	weak	line	at	the	high	point	of	enthusiasm—this	leads	to	delusion.	But	since	the	line	also	stand’s	at
the	top	of	the	upper	trigram	Chên,	whose	character	is	movement,	a	factor	to	be	reckoned	with	is	that	this
situation	has	no	permanence.



17.	Sui	/	Following

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	at	the	beginning	and	the	nine	 in	the	fifth	place.	The	reason
why	the	hexagram	means	following	is	that	the	strong	man	brings	himself	to	accept	subordination	to	that
which	is	weak.	The	first	and	the	fifth	line	are	both	strong	and	stand	under	weak	lines,	hence	they	are	the
rulers	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
Where	there	is	enthusiasm,	there	is	certain	to	be	following.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of

FOLLOWING.
Miscellaneous	Notes
FOLLOWING	tolerates	no	old	prejudices.
Appended	Judgments
The	heroes	of	old	tamed	the	ox	and	yoked	the	horse.	Thus	heavy	loads	could	be	transported	and

distant	regions	reached,	 for	 the	benefit	of	 the	world.	They	probably	took	this	 from	the	hexagram	of
FOLLOWING.

This	hexagram	consists	of	movement	below	and	joyousness	above:	it	shows	the	Arousing	(Chên)	under
the	 Joyous	 (Tui),	 suggesting	 rest,	 the	 more	 so	 since	 the	 nuclear	 trigrams	 Sun,	 the	 Gentle,	 and	 Kên,
Keeping	Still,	likewise	point	to	this	idea.	Thus	the	domestication	of	the	ox	and	the	horse	is	to	be	explained
as	a	means	to	labor	saving.	Success	derives	from	the	inner	structure	of	the	hexagram.	Transportation	of
heavy	loads	is	suggested	by	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain;	the	ox	that	carries	these	loads	is
analogous	to	the	earth	(the	mountain	belongs	to	the	earth).	Reaching	distant	regions	is	suggested	by	the
upper	nuclear	 trigram	Sun,	wind,	which	reaches	everywhere.	The	 traveling	cart	 is	drawn	by	 the	horse,
which,	like	heaven,	is	characterized	by	movement	(the	wind	belongs	to	heaven).

Tui	is	the	youngest	daughter,	Chên	the	eldest	son.	In	the	hexagram	as	a	whole,	as	well	as	in	the	case	of
the	 two	 rulers,	 the	 strong	element	places	 itself	under	 the	weak	 in	order	 to	obtain	a	 following.	 In	 their
movement	the	two	trigrams	have	the	same	upward	trend.

THE	JUDGMENT
FOLLOWING	has	supreme	success.
Perseverance	furthers.	No	blame.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
FOLLOWING.	The	firm	comes	and	places	itself	under	the	yielding.
Movement	and	joyousness:	FOLLOWING.
Great	success	and	perseverance	without	blame:	thus	one	is	followed	by	the	whole	world.
Great	indeed	is	the	meaning	of	the	time	of	FOLLOWING.

First,	 the	 name	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 explained	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 its	 structure	 and	 attributes.	 The	 firm
element	that	comes—that	is,	moves	from	above	downward	and	places	itself	under	the	yielding—consists
on	 the	 one	 hand	 of	 Chên,	 which	 places	 itself	 under	 Tui,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 of	 the	 two	 rulers	 of	 the
hexagram,	in	the	first	and	the	fifth	place,	both	of	which	place	themselves	under	yielding	lines.

Chên	 has	movement	 as	 its	 attribute,	 Tui	 has	 joyousness.	 Followers	 readily	 join	 a	movement	 that	 is
associated	 with	 joyousness.	 The	 explanation	 of	 the	 words	 of	 the	 text	 also	 gives	 expression	 to	 the
fundamental	principle	that	one	must	first	of	all	follow	in	the	right	way,	if	one	would	be	followed.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	in	the	middle	of	the	lake:
The	image	of	FOLLOWING.
Thus	the	superior	man	at	nightfall
Goes	indoors	for	rest	and	recuperation.

The	trigram	Chên	stands	 in	the	east,	Tui	 in	the	west.	The	time	between	them	is	night.	Similarly,	 the
image	designates	the	time	of	year—between	the	eighth	and	the	second	month—when	thunder	is	at	rest	in
the	lake.	This	gives	rise	to	the	idea	of	following	or	being	guided	by	the	laws	of	nature.

Such	 resting	 steels	 one’s	 energy	 for	 fresh	 action.	 Turning	 inward	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 upper
nuclear	 trigram	 Sun,	 which	 means	 going	 into,	 and	 rest	 by	 the	 lower	 nuclear	 trigram	 Kên,	 which
means	keeping	still.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	The	standard	is	changing.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
To	go	out	of	the	door	in	company
Produces	deeds.
b)	“The	standard	is	changing.”	To	follow	what	is	correct	brings	good	fortune.
“To	go	out	of	the	door	in	company	produces	deeds.”
One	does	not	lose	oneself.

This	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	trigram	Chên.	As	one	in	authority,	it	might	demand	that	others	follow	it,	but



it	 changes	 and	 follows	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place;	 since	 the	 latter	 line	 is	 central	 and	 correct,	 this
exceptional	procedure	brings	good	fortune.	“To	go	out	of	the	door”—this	is	because	the	line	is	outside	the
lower	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	meaning	door.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	If	one	clings	to	the	little	boy,
One	loses	the	strong	man.
b)	“If	one	clings	to	the	little	boy”:	one	cannot	be	with	both	at	once.

The	little	boy	is	the	weak	six	in	the	third	place,	the	strong	man	is	the	strong	nine	at	the	beginning.	The
trend	expressed	in	FOLLOWING	implies	in	itself	that	the	second	line	emulates	the	third.	But	the	latter	is
weak	and	untrustworthy,	hence	the	counsel	to	hold	rather	to	the	strong	man	below,	since	one	cannot	have
both	at	once.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	If	one	clings	to	the	strong	man,
One	loses	the	little	boy.
Through	following	one	finds	what	one	seeks.
It	furthers	one	to	remain	persevering.
b)	“If	one	clings	to	the	strong	man,”	one’s	will	gives	up	the	one	below.

Here	the	little	boy	is	the	six	in	the	second	place,	and	the	strong	man	is	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place.	In
accord	with	the	movement	of	FOLLOWING,	one	ought	to	hold	to	the	strong	man	ahead	and	give	up	the
weak	man	below.	The	strong	man	 is	 in	 the	place	of	 the	minister,	hence	one	obtains	 from	him	what	one
seeks.	But	the	essential	thing	is	to	remain	persevering,	in	order	not	to	deviate	from	the	right	path.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Following	creates	success.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
To	go	one’s	way	with	sincerity	brings	clarity.
How	could	there	be	blame	in	this?
b)	“Following	creates	success”:	this	bodes	misfortune.
“To	go	one’s	way	with	sincerity”:	this	brings	clear-sighted	deeds.

This	line	is	the	minister	who	follows	the	strong	line	that	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram—the	nine	in	the
fifth	place.	 In	 this	way	he	wins	 the	 success	 of	 having	people	 follow	him—a	success	he	 cannot	prevent,
because	he	is	not	correct	(a	strong	line	in	a	weak	place).	Thereby	he	draws	down	misfortune	upon	himself.
The	trigram	Chên	means	a	great	way.	This	line	is	over	Chên,	that	is,	on	the	way.	The	nuclear	trigram	Kên
means	brightness	and	light.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Sincere	in	the	good.	Good	fortune.
b)	“Sincere	in	the	good.	Good	fortune.”	The	place	is	correct	and	central.

The	six	at	the	top	symbolizes	a	sage	in	retirement.	The	present	line,	the	ruler,	follows	him.	The	ruler’s
correct	and	central	 character	 safeguards	him	against	conforming	 to	 those	beneath	him,	 from	whom	no
good	would	come	to	him.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	meets	with	firm	allegiance
And	is	still	further	bound.
The	king	introduces	him
To	the	Western	Mountain.
b)	“He	meets	with	firm	allegiance.”	At	the	top	it	ends.

This	line	is	at	the	top,	with	no	other	line	before	it	to	be	followed.	Hence	it	withdraws	from	the	world.
But	it	is	brought	back	by	the	firm	allegiance	of	the	ruler,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	The	Western	Mountain
is	suggested	by	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain,	and	the	upper	trigram	Tui,	which	lies	in	the	west.



18.	Ku	/	Work	on	What	Has	Been	Spoiled	[Decay]

The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place;	 for	 although	 all	 of	 the	 lines	 are	 occupied	 in
compensating	for	what	has	been	spoiled,	it	is	only	at	the	fifth	line	that	the	work	is	completed.	Hence	all	of
the	other	lines	have	warnings	appended	to	them,	and	only	of	the	fifth	is	it	said:	“One	meets	with	praise.”

The	Sequence
When	one	follows	others	with	pleasure,	there	are	certain	to	be	undertakings.	Hence	there	follows

the	 hexagram	 of	 WORK	 ON	 WHAT	 HAS	 BEEN	 SPOILED.	 Work	 on	 what	 has	 been	 spoiled	 means
undertakings.

Miscellaneous	Notes
WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED.	Afterward	there	is	order.

The	structure	of	 the	hexagram	is	not	 favorable.	The	heavy	Kên	 is	above;	below	 is	 the	gentle,	 listless
Sun,	the	eldest	daughter,	who	is	occupied	with	the	youngest	son.	But	this	stagnation	is	not	permanent	or
unalterable.	The	nuclear	trigrams	show	another	trend.	Chên	comes	forth	from	Tui;	both	tend	upward	in
movement	 and	 undertake	 the	 work	 of	 improvement	 energetically	 and	 joyously.	 This	 hexagram	 is	 the
inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED
Has	supreme	success.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Before	the	starting	point,	three	days.
After	the	starting	point,	three	days.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	 BEEN	 SPOILED.	 The	 firm	 is	 above	 and	 the	 yielding	 below;	 gentle	 and

standing	still—that	which	has	been	spoiled.
“WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED	has	supreme	success,”	and	order	comes	into	the	world.
“It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.”	On	going	one	will	have	things	to	do.
“Before	the	starting	point,	three	days.	After	the	starting	point,	three	days.”	That	a	new	beginning

follows	every	ending,	is	the	course	of	heaven.
The	 name	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 explained	 in	 its	 structure	 and	 in	 the	 attributes	 of	 the	 trigrams.	 The

preceding	hexagram	is	here	reversed:	the	strong,	upward-striving	force	is	above,	and	the	weak,	sinking
force	is	below.	In	this	way	the	movements	diverge,	and	relationships	are	lacking.	The	attributes	of	the	two
trigrams	 are	 inner	 weakness,	 gentle,	 irresolute	 drifting,	 and,	 on	 the	 outside,	 inaction.	 This	 leads	 to
spoiling.
At	the	same	time,	however,	something	thus	spoiled	imposes	the	task	of	working	on	it,	with	expectation

of	success.	Through	work	on	what	has	been	spoiled	the	world	is	set	 in	order	once	more.	But	something
must	be	undertaken.	Crossing	of	the	great	water	is	suggested	by	the	lower	trigram,	which	means	wood
(hence	boat)	and	wind	(hence	progress),	and	by	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	lake.
The	phrase	“before	the	starting	point,”	rendered	literally,	means	“before	the	sign	Chia.”	The	trigram

Chên,	 in	 the	 east,	 means	 spring	 and	 love,	 and	 the	 cyclic	 sign1	 Chia	 (with	 I)	 is	 next	 to	 it.	 Chia	 is	 the
“starting	point.”	Before	the	three	spring	months,	whose	days	taken	together	are	called	Chia	(and	I),	lies
winter;	here	the	things	of	the	past	come	to	an	end.	After	the	spring	months	comes	summer;	from	spring	to
summer	 is	 the	new	beginning.	The	words,	“Before	 the	sign	Chia,	 three	days.	After	 the	sign	Chia,	 three
days,”	are	thus	explained	by	the	words	of	the	commentary:	“That	a	new	beginning	follows	every	ending,	is
the	course	of	heaven.”	Since	inner	conditions	are	the	theme	of	this	hexagram,	that	is,	work	on	what	has
been	 spoiled	 by	 the	 parents,	 love	 must	 prevail	 and	 extend	 over	 both	 the	 beginning	 and	 the	 end	 (cf.
hexagram	57,	Sun,	THE	GENTLE).

Figure	6



Another	explanation	is	suggested	by	the	order	of	the	trigrams	in	the	Inner-World	Arrangement	[fig.	6;
cf.	fig.	2,	p.	269].	The	starting	point	(Chia)	is	Chên.	Going	three	trigrams	back	from	this,	we	come	to	the
trigram	Ch’ien,	the	Creative;	going	three	trigrams	forward	we	come	to	K’un,	the	Receptive.	Now	Ch’ien
and	K’un	are	the	father	and	mother,	and	the	hexagram	refers	to	work	on	what	has	been	spoiled	by	these
two.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	blows	low	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	DECAY.
Thus	the	superior	man	stirs	up	the	people
And	strengthens	their	spirit.

The	wind	blowing	down	the	mountain	causes	decay.	But	 the	reverse	movement	shows	work	on	what
has	been	spoiled.	First	there	is	the	wind	under	the	influence	of	Chên,	the	Arousing,	which	stirs	things	up;
then	comes	the	mountain,	joined	with	the	lake,	which	joyously	fosters	the	spirit	of	men	and	nourishes	it.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
If	there	is	a	son,
No	blame	rests	upon	the	departed	father.
Danger.	In	the	end	good	fortune.
b)	“Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.”
He	receives	in	his	thoughts	the	deceased	father.

When	 the	 first	 and	 the	 top	 line	 change,	 this	 hexagram	 becomes	 T’ai,	 PEACE,	 in	 which	 the	 father,
Ch’ien,	 is	 below	 and	 the	 mother,	 K’un,	 above.	 Hence	 the	 recurrent	 idea	 of	 improving	 what	 has	 been
spoiled	by	the	father	or	the	mother.	This	line	stands	in	an	inner	relationship	of	receiving	to	the	strong	nine
in	the	second	place.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	mother.
One	must	not	be	too	persevering.
b)	“Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	mother.”
He	finds	the	middle	way.

This	line	is	strong	and	central,	and	at	the	beginning	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	hence	joyous.	Since	the
line	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 weak	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 which	 represents	 the
mother,	strength	must	not	be	carried	to	extremes	by	a	too	obstinate	perseverance.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
There	will	be	a	little	remorse.	No	great	blame.
b)	“Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.”
In	the	end	there	is	no	blame.

This	line	is	at	the	beginning	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Chên,	the	eldest	son,	hence	the	image	of	work	on
what	 has	 been	 spoiled	 by	 the	 father.	 The	 line	 is	 too	 strong	 to	 be	 in	 the	 strong	 place	 of	 transition.
Therefore	it	might	be	thought	that	the	situation	would	lead	to	mistakes,	but	good	intention	compensates
in	this	case.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Tolerating	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
In	continuing	one	sees	humiliation.
b)	“Tolerating	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.”	He	goes,	but	as	yet	finds	nothing.

This	line	is	especially	weak,	and	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	the	Joyous.	In	the	given	situation
nothing	will	be	gained	by	letting	things	drift.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
One	meets	with	praise.
b)	“Setting	right	what	has	been	spoiled	by	the	father.
One	meets	with	praise.”	He	receives	him	in	virtue.

This	line	is	central,	in	the	place	of	honor,	and	yielding,	hence	very	well	fitted	for	rectifying	mistakes	of
the	past	with	forbearance,	yet	energetically.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	does	not	serve	kings	and	princes,
Sets	himself	higher	goals.
b)	“He	does	not	serve	kings	and	princes.”	Such	an	attitude	may	be	taken	as	a	model.

This	line	is	at	the	top,	strong,	and	at	the	highest	point	of	the	trigram	Kên,	the	mountain.	Therefore	it
does	not	serve	the	king	in	the	fifth	place	but	sets	its	goals	higher.	It	does	not	work	for	one	era,	but	for	the
world	and	for	all	time.



19.	Lin	/	Approach

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	at	the	beginning	and	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	of	which	the
Commentary	on	the	Decision	says:	“The	firm	penetrates	and	grows.”

The	Sequence
When	 there	 are	 things	 to	 do,	 one	 can	 become	 great.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

APPROACH.	Approach	means	becoming	great.
Miscellaneous	Notes
The	meaning	of	the	hexagrams	of	APPROACH	and	CONTEMPLATION	is	that	they	partly	give	and

partly	take.
The	 organization	 of	 this	 hexagram	 is	 altogether	 favorable.	 The	 two	 lines	 entering	 from	 below	 and

pushing	 upward	 give	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 hexagram	 its	 character.	 Tui	 below	moves	 upward,	 the	 upper
trigram	K’un	sinks	downward;	 thus	 the	 two	movements	come	 toward	each	other.	The	same	 thing	 takes
place	to	an	even	greater	extent	as	regards	the	nuclear	trigrams.	The	lower,	Chên,	is	thunder,	which	moves
upward,	while	the	upper,	K’un,	moves	downward.

THE	JUDGMENT
APPPROACH	has	supreme	success.
Perseverance	furthers.
When	the	eighth	month	comes,
There	will	be	misfortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
APPROACH.	The	firm	penetrates	and	grows.
Joyous	and	devoted.	The	firm	is	in	the	middle	and	finds	correspondence.	“Great	success	through

correctness”:	this	is	the	course	of	heaven.
“When	the	eighth	month	comes,	there	will	be	misfortune.”	Recession	is	not	slow	in	coming.
b)	The	name	of	the	hexagram	is	explained	through	its	structure.	The	firm	element	that	penetrates

and	grows	are	the	two	yang	lines.	Joyousness	and	devotion	are	the	attributes	of	the	two	trigrams.	The
firm	element	in	the	middle	that	finds	correspondence	is	the	nine	in	the	second	place.	It	is	taken	as	the
basis	for	the	explanation	of	the	words	of	the	hexagram.	The	eighth	month	is	suggested	in	the	fact	that
the	next	hexagram,	Kuan	(CONTEMPLATION,	VIEW),	in	which	the	retreat	of	the	strong	lines	parallels
their	advance	here,	comes	exactly	eight	months	after	this	hexagram	in	the	cycle	of	the	year.
THE	IMAGE
The	earth	above	the	lake:
The	image	of	APPROACH.
Thus	the	superior	man	is	inexhaustible
In	his	will	to	teach,
And	without	limits
In	his	tolerance	and	protection	of	the	people.

The	lake,	which	fructifies	the	earth	with	its	inexhaustible	moisture,	suggests	teaching,	which	fructifies
man’s	inner	being.	The	earth	means	the	masses,	hence	the	upholding	and	protection	of	the	people.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Joint	approach.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“Joint	approach.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.”
His	will	is	to	act	correctly.

This	 line	 advances	 jointly	with	 the	 second,	hence	 “joint	 approach.”	The	word	 joint	 also	 contains	 the
idea	of	stimulus,	influence.	Having	been	called	in,	the	present	line	seeks	to	influence	the	weak	line	in	the
second	place.1	But	its	will	is	to	act	correctly,	since	it	is	strong	in	a	strong	place.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Joint	approach.
Good	fortune.
Everything	furthers.
b)	“Joint	approach.	Good	fortune.	Everything	furthers.”
One	need	not	yield	to	fate.

Here,	coming	to	the	upper	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	we	are	reminded	that	as	the	joint	ascent	of	the	two
strong	 lines	 is	 grounded	 in	 fate,	 so	 fate	may	 in	 time	 also	 bring	 regression.	 But	 if—in	 accord	with	 the
nuclear	 trigram	 Chên—an	 upward	 movement	 is	 initiated	 in	 time,	 this	 movement	 is	 strong	 enough	 to
counteract	fate,	should	the	consequences	of	fate	set	in	before	these	precautions	are	taken.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Comfortable	approach.



Nothing	that	would	further.
If	one	is	induced	to	grieve	over	it,
One	becomes	free	of	blame.
b)	 “Comfortable	 approach.”	 The	 place	 is	 not	 the	 appropriate	 one.	 A	 fault	 that	 induces	 grief	 no

longer	exists.
The	third	line	is	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	of	joyousness,	hence	“comfortable	approach.”	Its	place	is	not

the	proper	one.	It	is	a	weak	line	in	a	strong	place,	hence	nothing	furthers.	But	because	it	also	stands	in
the	middle	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	Chên,	meaning	 shock	 and	 terror,	 there	 is	 the	 possibility	 of	 remorse.
Because	of	this,	movement—likewise	a	characteristic	of	Chên—sets	in,	and	thus	the	mistake	is	overcome.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Complete	approach.
No	blame.
b)	“Complete	approach.	No	blame,”	for	the	place	is	the	appropriate	one.

Here	we	have	 the	most	 intimate	mutual	 approach	 of	 the	 upper	 and	 the	 lower	 trigram.	 The	 place	 is
appropriate—a	yielding	 line	 in	a	yielding	place.	The	 line	 is	 in	 the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	 the
nine	at	the	beginning.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Wise	approach.
This	is	right	for	a	great	prince.
Good	fortune.
b)	What	is	right	for	a	great	prince—this	means	that	he	should	walk	in	the	middle.

The	wisdom	lies	in	the	fact	that	the	weak	line	in	the	central	place	of	the	ruler	knows	and	appreciates
the	 strong,	 efficient	man	 in	 the	 second	 place,	with	whom	 it	 has	 a	 relationship	 of	 correspondence.	 The
bond	uniting	the	two	is	their	common	central	course.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Greathearted	approach.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.
b)	“Greathearted	approach.”	The	will	is	directed	inward.

At	first	it	might	be	assumed	that	the	six	at	the	top,	which	has	no	relationship	of	correspondence,	would
be	 drawing	 away	 from	 the	 other	 lines.	 But	 in	 the	 time	 of	 APPROACH	 its	 direction	 is	 inward,	 that	 is,
downward,	so	that	it	remains	in	relation	with	the	other	lines	of	the	hexagram.



20.	Kuan	/	Contemplation	(View)

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	at	the	top.	The	sentence	in	the
Commentary	on	the	Decision,	“A	great	view	is	above,”	refers	to	these.

The	Sequence
When	 things	 are	 great,	 one	 can	 contemplate	 them.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

CONTEMPLATION.
Miscellaneous	Notes
The	meaning	of	the	hexagrams	of	APPROACH	and	CONTEMPLATION	is	that	they	partly	give	and

partly	take.
This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one:	above	is	a	tree,	under	it	the	earth.	The	tree	on	the

earth	is	something	to	be	viewed.	The	upper	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	the	mountain,	gives	the	same	idea,	for	it
too	towers	up	and	is	widely	visible.	The	hexagram	has	a	double	meaning:	it	“partly	gives,”	i.e.,	provides	a
sublime	view,	and	“partly	takes,”	i.e.,	contemplates,	seeks	to	attain	something	by	contemplation.

THE	JUDGMENT
CONTEMPLATION.	The	ablution	has	been	made,
But	not	yet	the	offering.
Full	of	trust	they	look	up	to	him.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
A	great	view	is	above.	Devoted	and	gentle.	Central	and	correct,	he	is	something	for	the	world	to

view.
“Contemplation.	The	ablution	has	been	made,	but	not	yet	the	offering.	Full	of	trust	they	look	up	to

him.”
Those	below	look	toward	him	and	are	transformed.	He	affords	them	a	view	of	the	divine	way	of

heaven,	and	the	four	seasons	do	not	deviate	from	their	rule.	Thus	the	holy	man	uses	the	divine	way	to
give	instruction,	and	the	whole	world	submits	to	him.
The	great	view	above	consists	of	the	two	lines	in	the	fifth	and	the	top	place.	The	lower	trigram	K’un	is

devoted,	the	upper,	Sun,	 is	gentle.	The	nine	 in	the	fifth	place,	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	 is	central	and
correct.	 The	 nuclear	 trigram	 Kên,	 mountain,	 appears	 twice	 in	 the	 make-up	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 the	 one
trigram	intermeshed	with	the	other.

Kên	indicates	gates	and	palaces;	these	bring	to	mind	the	temple	of	the	ancestors,	mysteriously	locked.
Kên	 is	 the	 hand,	 Sun	 means	 pure,	 hence	 washing	 of	 the	 hands.	 Kên	 means	 pausing,	 hence	 the
uncompleted	sacrifice.	The	rite	of	sacrifice	 is	shown	to	the	people	and	contemplated	by	them.	The	holy
man	knows	the	laws	of	heaven.	He	reveals	them	to	the	people,	and	his	predictions	come	true.	Just	as	the
seasons	of	the	year	move	under	divine	and	immutable	laws,	so	events	do	not	deviate	from	the	course	he
prophesies.	Thus	he	uses	his	knowledge	of	the	divine	ways	to	teach	the	people,	and	the	people	trust	him
and	look	up	to	him.

THE	IMAGE
The	wind	blows	over	the	earth:
The	image	of	CONTEMPLATION.
Thus	the	kings	of	old	visited	the	regions	of	the	world,
Contemplated	the	people,
And	gave	them	instruction.

The	wind	blows	everywhere	on	earth	and	reveals	all	things.	Thus	the	journeys	of	the	kings	of	antiquity
are	symbolized	by	 the	 trigram	Sun,	wind,	and	 the	regions	of	 the	world	by	 the	 trigram	K’un,	earth.	The
contemplation	is	the	taking	and	the	instruction	is	the	giving	for	which	the	hexagram	stands.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Boylike	contemplation.
For	an	inferior	man,	no	blame.
For	a	superior	man,	humiliation.
b)	The	boylike	contemplation	of	the	six	at	the	beginning	is	the	way	of	inferior	people.

The	six	in	the	first	place	pictures	a	small	(because	it	is	a	yin	line)	boy	(because	it	is	in	a	yang	place).	He
is	very	far	away	from	the	object	of	everyone’s	gaze,	i.e.,	the	prince	in	the	fifth	place,	with	whom	he	has	no
relationship;	hence	the	idea	of	a	boyishly	inexperienced	way	of	looking	about.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Contemplation	through	the	crack	of	the	door.
Furthering	for	the	perseverance	of	a	woman.
b)	 “Contemplation	 through	 the	 crack	 of	 the	 door”	 is	 humiliating	 even	 where	 there	 is	 the

perseverance	of	a	woman.



The	nuclear	trigram	Kên	indicates	a	door,	the	trigram	K’un	a	closed	door,	hence	the	crack	of	the	door.
The	six	in	the	second	place	indicates	a	girl.	This	line	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	nine	in
the	fifth	place,	hence	a	connection	exists,	although	it	is	greatly	impeded.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Contemplation	of	my	life
Decides	the	choice
Between	advance	and	retreat.
b)	“Contemplation	of	my	life	decides	the	choice	between	advance	and	retreat.”	The	right	way	is

not	lost.
Here	a	weak	line	in	the	place	of	transition	is	undecided	whether	to	go	forward	or	backward.	It	is	at	the

bottom	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain.	Hence	the	backward	look	over	its	life,	hence	also	the	idea	of
the	right	way.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Contemplation	of	the	light	of	the	kingdom.
It	furthers	one	to	exert	influence	as	the	guest	of	a	king.
b)	“Contemplation	of	the	light	of	the	kingdom.”	One	is	honored	as	a	guest.

This	line	is	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	K’un,	which	means	kingdom,	and	also	in	the	middle	of	the
nuclear	trigram	Kên,	meaning	light.	Furthermore,	it	is	near	the	strong,	central	ruler,	the	nine	in	the	fifth
place,	and	stands	in	a	receiving	relationship	to	it.	Hence	the	idea	of	its	being	treated	as	a	guest.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Contemplation	of	my	life.
The	superior	man	is	without	blame.
b)	“Contemplation	of	my	life,”	that	is,	contemplation	of	the	people.

Here	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	in	the	honored	place,	central	and	correct,	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear
trigram	Kên,	mountain,	 hence	 the	 viewing	 of	 life	 as	 from	a	mountain.	He	who	 is	 the	 object	 of	 general
contemplation	here	contemplates	himself,	especially	with	regard	to	the	influence	he	has	exerted	upon	the
people.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Contemplation	of	his	life.
The	superior	man	is	without	blame.
b)	“Contemplation	of	his	life.”	The	will	is	not	yet	pacified.

Here	one	ruler	of	the	hexagram	looks	from	the	vantage	of	the	greatest	height	upon	the	nine	in	the	fifth
place.	He	has	not	yet	forgotten	the	world	and	is	therefore	still	concerned	with	its	affairs.



21.	Shih	Ho	/	Biting	Through

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	The	Commentary	on	the	Decision	says	of	it:	“The
yielding	receives	the	place	of	honor	and	goes	upward.”

The	Sequence
When	there	is	something	that	can	be	contemplated,	there	is	something	that	creates	union.	Hence

there	follows	the	hexagram	of	BITING	THROUGH.	Biting	through	means	union.
Miscellaneous	Notes
BITING	THROUGH	means	consuming.
Appended	Judgments
When	the	sun	stood	at	midday,	the	Divine	Husbandman	held	a	market.	He	caused	the	people	of

the	 earth	 to	 come	 together	 and	 collected	 the	 wares	 of	 the	 earth.	 They	 exchanged	 these	 with	 one
another,	then	returned	home,	and	each	thing	found	its	place.	Probably	he	took	this	from	the	hexagram
of	BITING	THROUGH.

The	 hexagram	 is	 here	 explained	 in	 the	 light	 of	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams	 Li	 and	 Chên.	 Li
represents	 the	 sun	 high	 above,	 while	 Chên	 represents	 the	 turmoil	 of	 the	 market	 below.	 The	 inner
structure	of	the	hexagram	is	by	no	means	as	favorable	as	the	outer	form	might	lead	one	to	conclude.	It	is
true	 that	 clarity	 and	 movement	 are	 present,	 but	 between	 them,	 as	 opposing	 elements,	 there	 stand	 the
nuclear	trigrams	K’an,	danger,	and	Kên,	Keeping	Still—both	formed	by	reason	of	the	one	fateful	line	in	the
fourth	place.

THE	JUDGMENT
BITING	THROUGH	has	success.
It	is	favorable	to	let	justice	be	administered.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
There	is	something	between	the	corners	of	the	mouth.	This	is	called	BITING	THROUGH.
“BITING	THROUGH,	and	moreover,	success.”	For	firm	and	yielding	are	distinct	from	each	other.
Movement	and	clarity.	Thunder	and	lightning	are	united	and	form	lines.	The	yielding	receives	the

place	of	honor	and	goes	upward.
Although	it	is	not	in	the	appropriate	place,	it	is	favorable	to	let	justice	be	administered.

The	name	of	the	hexagram	is	here	explained	on	the	basis	of	its	structure.	The	top	line	and	the	lowest
are	the	jaws.	The	nine	in	the	fourth	place	stands	between	the	two	as	an	obstacle	to	be	removed	by	biting
through.	 This	 points	 to	 the	 necessity	 of	 using	 force.	 The	 firm	 yang	 lines	 and	 the	 yielding	 yin	 lines	 are
clearly	set	apart	one	from	the	other,	without	falling	asunder.	This	is	the	substance	of	the	hexagram.	In	the
same	way,	innocence	and	guilt	are	clearly	distinguishable	in	the	eyes	of	a	just	judge.

Movement	 is	 the	 attribute	 of	 Chên,	 clarity	 that	 of	 Li;	 both	 tend	 upwards,	 thus	 uniting	 and	 forming
clearly	visible	lines.	The	movements	are	separate,	the	coming	together	occurs	in	the	heavens,	whereupon
the	line	of	the	lightning	appears.1

The	 ruler	of	 the	hexagram	 is	 yielding	by	nature,	a	quality	desirable	 in	 legal	proceedings,	because	 it
prevents	cruelty.	However,	this	yielding	quality	is	compensated	by	the	firmness	of	the	place,	hence	does
not	turn	into	weakness.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	and	lightning:
The	image	of	BITING	THROUGH.
Thus	the	kings	of	former	times	made	firm	the	laws
Through	clearly	defined	penalties.

Thunder	and	 lightning	 follow	upon	each	other	 invariably.	The	phrase	 is	 “thunder	and	 lightning,”	not
“lightning	and	thunder,”	because	the	movement	starts	from	below	(however,	the	text	according	to	Hsiang
An	Shih2	on	an	old	stone	tablet	reads,	“Lightning	and	thunder”).	The	penal	severity	that	serves	to	make
men	 avoid	 transgressions	 should	 be	 as	 clearly	 defined	 as	 lightning.	 “Penalties”	 corresponds	 with	 the
upper	nuclear	 trigram	K’an,	danger.	The	strengthening	of	 the	 laws,	 in	order	to	 intimidate	the	heedless,
should	 ensue	 with	 the	 decisiveness	 of	 thunder.	 The	 laws	 are	 stable	 and	 stand	 rooted	 like	 a	 mountain
(lower	nuclear	trigram	Kên).

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	His	feet	are	fastened	in	the	stocks
So	that	his	toes	disappear.
No	blame.
b)	“His	feet	are	fastened	in	the	stocks,	so	that	his	toes	disappear.	No	blame.”	He	cannot	walk.

Chên	is	foot;	here	it	is	below,	hence	toes.	Chên	also	stands	for	the	stocks.	The	line	at	the	beginning	is
hard	and	stubborn,	and	must	 therefore	be	punished.	But	 since	 it	 is	 seized	at	 its	 first	movement,	 it	will
improve	under	light	punishment,	hence	there	is	no	blame.

Six	in	the	second	place:



	
a)	Bites	through	tender	meat,
So	that	his	nose	disappears.
No	blame.
b)	“Bites	through	tender	meat,	so	that	his	nose	disappears.”	He	rests	upon	a	hard	line.

The	nuclear	trigram	Kên	means	nose.	This	is	a	yielding	line	in	a	yielding	place,	and	it	rests	on	the	hard
nine	at	the	beginning;	hence	it	goes	a	little	too	far	in	punishment.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Bites	on	old	dried	meat
And	strikes	on	something	poisonous.
Slight	humiliation.	No	blame.
b)	“Strikes	on	something	poisonous.”	The	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.

The	nuclear	trigram	K’an	means	poison.	The	place	is	not	appropriate—a	weak	line	is	in	a	strong	place
at	a	time	of	transition.	Because	of	the	lack	of	power,	decisions	are	allowed	to	hang	fire	indefinitely.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Bites	on	dried	gristly	meat.
Receives	metal	arrows.
It	furthers	one	to	be	mindful	of	difficulties
And	to	be	persevering.
Good	fortune.
b)	“It	furthers	one	to	be	mindful	of	difficulties	and	to	be	persevering.	Good	fortune.”	He	does	not

yet	give	light.
Firmness	in	a	yielding	place	points	to	meat	with	bones.	This	is	dried	by	the	sun	(Li,	in	which	this	is	the

beginning	line).	The	nuclear	trigram	K’an	means	arrows.	The	line	is	in	the	place	of	the	official.	It	is	strong,
but	 in	 view	 of	 the	 weakness	 of	 its	 place,	 remains	 aware	 of	 the	 difficulties,	 hence	 the	 augury	 of	 good
fortune.	Although	it	is	at	the	beginning	of	Li,	the	line	does	not	yet	give	light,	because	it	is	in	the	middle	of
the	nuclear	trigram	K’an.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Bites	on	dried	lean	meat.
Receives	yellow	gold.
Perseveringly	aware	of	danger.
No	blame.
b)	“Perseveringly	aware	of	danger.	No	blame.”	He	has	found	what	is	appropriate.

The	line	is	yielding,	hence	“lean”	meat,	and	in	the	middle	of	Li,	hence	“dried”	meat.	When	it	changes,
the	upper	trigram	becomes	Ch’ien,	which	means	metal.	As	 the	middle	 line	of	K’un,	 its	color	 is	yellow—
hence	 “yellow	gold.”	By	 reason	of	 its	mildness	 in	 the	place	of	honor,	 it	 succeeds	 in	biting	 through	and
receives	yellow	gold,	the	symbol	of	firmness	and	loyalty.	Therefore	in	its	verdict	it	hits	upon	what	is	right
and	appropriate,	so	that	everything	turns	out	properly.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	His	neck	is	fastened	in	the	wooden	cangue,
So	that	his	ears	disappear.
Misfortune.
b)	 “His	 neck	 is	 fastened	 in	 the	 wooden	 cangue,	 so	 that	 his	 ears	 disappear.”	 He	 does	 not	 hear

clearly.
The	top	line	indicates	the	head;	the	trigram	Li,	fetters.	The	nuclear	trigram	K’an	means	ear.	The	line	is

too	hard,	places	itself	arrogantly	over	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	and	does	not	heed	him.	It	therefore	does
not	heed	the	just	sentence	passed	upon	it,	and	because	of	this	meets	with	the	misfortune	of	being	unable
to	hear	any	longer,	even	if	it	should	desire	to	do	so.



22.	Pi	/	Grace

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	six	in	the	second	place	and	the	nine	at	the	top.	The	Commentary	on
the	Decision	refers	to	these	when	it	says:	“The	yielding	comes	and	gives	form	to	the	firm,	the	firm	ascends
and	gives	form	to	the	yielding.”

The	Sequence
Things	 should	 not	 unite	 abruptly	 and	 ruthlessly;	 hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of	 GRACE.

Grace	is	the	same	as	adornment.
Miscellaneous	Notes
GRACE	means	being	undyed.

The	most	perfect	grace	consists	not	in	external	ornamentation	but	in	allowing	the	original	material	to
stand	forth,	beautified	by	being	given	form.	The	upper	trigram	Kên,	the	mountain,	is	disposed	to	remain
still;	 fire,	 Li,	 blazes	 up	 from	below	and	 illumines	 the	mountain.	 This	movement	 is	 strengthened	by	 the
nuclear	trigram	Chên,	which	likewise	moves	upward,	while	the	resting	weight	of	the	mountain	is	activated
to	a	falling	movement	by	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	K’an.	Thus	the	inner	structure	of	the	hexagram	shows
a	harmonious	equalization	of	movement,	giving	no	excess	of	energies	 to	 the	one	side	or	 the	other.	This
hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
GRACE	has	success.
In	small	matters
It	is	favorable	to	undertake	something.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“GRACE	 has	 success.”	 The	 yielding	 comes	 and	 gives	 form	 to	 the	 firm;	 therefore,	 “Success.”	 A

detached	firm	line	ascends	and	gives	form	to	the	yielding;	therefore,	“In	small	matters	it	is	favorable
to	undertake	something.”	This	is	the	form	of	heaven.	Having	form,	clear	and	still:	this	is	the	form	of
men.	 If	 the	 form	of	heaven	 is	contemplated,	 the	changes	of	 time	can	be	discovered.	 If	 the	 forms	of
men	are	contemplated,	one	can	shape	the	world.

The	text	of	the	commentary	does	not	appear	to	be	intact.	There	seems	to	be	a	sentence	missing	before,
“This	 is	 the	 form	of	heaven.”	Wang	Pi1	 says:	 “The	 firm	and	 the	yielding	unite	alternately	and	construct
forms:	this	is	the	form	of	heaven.”	This	was	taken	as	the	original	text,	now	missing,	but	Mao	Ch’i	Ling2
takes	another	view	and	sees	in	it	only	an	explanation	of	the	foregoing	sentence.	But	something	of	the	sort
must	in	fact	be	presupposed.

The	yielding	element	 that	comes	 is	 the	six	 in	 the	second	place.	 It	places	 itself	between	the	 two	 firm
lines	and	gives	them	success,	gives	them	form.	The	strong	element	that	detaches	itself	is	the	nine	at	the
top.	It	places	itself	at	the	head	of	the	two	upper	yielding	lines	and	gives	them	the	possibility	of	attaining
form.	In	each	case,	the	yang	principle	is	the	content,	the	yin	principle	the	form.	In	the	first	case	it	is	the
yin	line	that	bestows	form	directly	and	therefore	brings	about	success,	whereas	the	ascending	yang	line,
by	 lending	content,	only	 indirectly	provides	 the	material	on	which	 the	otherwise	empty	 form	of	 the	yin
lines	can	work	itself	out.	Hence	the	effect	is	that	it	is	favorable	for	“the	small”	to	undertake	something.

The	form	of	heaven	is	symbolized	by	the	four	trigrams	constituting	the	hexagram.	The	lower	primary
trigram	Li	is	the	sun,	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	K’an	is	the	moon;	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Chên	by	its
movement	represents	the	Great	Bear,	and	the	upper	primary	trigram	Kên	by	its	stillness	represents	the
constellations.	If	one	observes	the	rotation	of	the	Great	Bear,	one	knows	the	course	of	the	year;	through
contemplation	of	the	course	of	the	sun	and	the	phases	of	the	moon,	one	recognizes	the	time	of	day	and	the
periods	of	the	month.

The	 form	 of	 human	 life	 results	 from	 the	 clearly	 defined	 (Li)	 and	 firmly	 established	 (Kên)	 rules	 of
conduct,	 within	 which	 love	 (light	 principle)	 and	 justice	 (dark	 principle)	 build	 up	 the	 combinations	 of
content	and	form.	Here	too	love	is	the	content	and	justice	the	form.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	at	the	foot	of	the	mountain:
The	image	of	GRACE.
Thus	does	the	superior	man	proceed
When	clearing	up	current	affairs.
But	he	dare	not	decide	controversial	issues	in	this	way.

This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the	 preceding	 one.	 In	 the	 latter	we	 find	 brightness	 and	movement;
these	 indicate	 a	 swift	 carrying	 out	 of	 penalties	 according	 to	 clearly	 understood	 laws.	 Here	 we	 have
standstill	(Kên)	outside	and	clarity	(Li)	inside,	and	this	means	a	theoretical,	not	a	practical	turn	of	mind.
This	 attitude	 suffices	 for	 the	 application	 of	 the	 established	 rules	 of	 everyday	 affairs,	 but	 not	 for
extraordinary	things.	One	ruler	of	 the	hexagram	is	 too	weak,	 the	other	 too	 far	outside	to	be	capable	of
taking	hold	of	the	situation.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	He	lends	grace	to	his	toes,	leaves	the	carriage,	and	walks.



b)	“He	leaves	the	carriage	and	walks,”	for	it	accords	with	duty	not	to	ride.
Being	 lowest,	 this	 line	corresponds	 to	 the	 toes.	The	nuclear	 trigram	K’an	means	a	carriage.	But	 the

present	 line	 is	 below	 this	 trigram,	hence	does	not	 ride.	 The	 six	 in	 the	 second	place	 is	 the	 ruler	 of	 the
hexagram;	the	nine	in	the	beginning	has	no	relationship	with	this	ruler,	so	that	it	is	not	fitting	for	the	line
to	ride.	On	the	other	hand,	as	a	yang	line,	it	possesses	sufficient	inner	strength	to	be	reconciled	to	the	fate
thus	imposed.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Lends	grace	to	the	beard	on	his	chin.
b)	“Lends	grace	to	the	beard	on	his	chin”:	that	is,	he	ascends	with	the	one	above.

The	third	line	is	the	chin	and	the	second	is,	as	it	were,	merely	its	appendage.	The	upward	movement
that	evokes	grace	takes	place	 in	the	two	lines	together.	The	yielding	element	can	adorn	the	strong,	but
cannot	add	to	it	any	independent	quality.	This	line	has	significance	only	in	the	hexagram	taken	as	a	whole;
in	its	individual	aspect	it	is	not	especially	important.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Graceful	and	moist.
Constant	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	constant	perseverance	cannot,	in	the	end,	be	put	to	shame.

The	nine	 in	 the	 third	 place	has	 content,	 because	 it	 is	 a	 strong	 line	 in	 a	 strong	place;	 the	 six	 in	 the
second	place	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	of	holding	 together	with	 it	 and	adorns	 it.	Hence	grace.	The	nuclear
trigram	 in	 which	 this	 line	 occupies	 the	 middle	 place	 is	 K’an,	 water,	 hence	 moistness.	 Moistness	 is	 the
height	of	grace,	and	the	line	moreover	stands	at	the	highest	point	of	the	trigram	Li,	clarity.	But	since	it
also	 stands	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 K’an,	 the	 abyss,	 there	 is	 a	 danger	 that	 it	 may	 be
submerged.	Hence	the	praise	of	constant	perseverance	as	a	protection	against	this	danger.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Grace	or	simplicity?
A	white	horse	comes	as	if	on	wings.
He	is	not	a	robber,
He	will	woo	at	the	right	time.
b)	The	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	in	doubt;	this	accords	with	its	place.
“He	is	not	a	robber,	he	will	woo	at	the	right	time.”
In	the	end,	one	remains	free	of	blame.

The	six	 in	 the	 fourth	place	 stands	outside	 the	 lower	 trigram	and	at	 the	beginning	of	 the	upper	one;
hence,	because	of	 its	weakness,	some	uncertainty	arises.	This	 is	resolved	by	the	quickly	advancing	first
line,	which	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	it.	The	trigram	Chên	means	a	white	horse,	hence
the	image.	White	is	the	color	of	simplicity.	In	itself	the	intention	of	the	approaching	line	is	not	quite	clear,
because	the	weak	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	of	danger.	However,	there	is
nothing	to	fear,	because	the	inner	relation	to	the	oncoming	line	preponderates.	It	helps	in	warding	off	the
danger	of	exaggerated	grace	and	in	returning	to	simplicity.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Grace	in	hills	and	gardens.
The	roll	of	silk	is	meager	and	small.
Humiliation,	but	in	the	end	good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	has	joy.

The	upper	trigram	Kên	means	a	large	hill;	the	nuclear	trigram	Chên	means	a	grove.	By	a	change	in	the
line,	 there	 arises	 Sun,	meaning	 a	 roll	 of	 silk.	 The	 fifth	 place	 really	 depends	 on	 the	 second,	 but	 in	 this
instance	there	is	no	relationship	with	the	line	in	that	place,	because	it	too	is	weak.	Hence	the	alliance	with
the	strong	line	at	the	top,	in	order	to	enjoy	grace	with	it.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Simple	grace.	No	blame.
b)	“Simple	grace.	No	blame.”	The	one	above	attains	his	will.

The	 top	 line	 stands	 outside,	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 trigram	 Kên,	 mountain.	 Its	 strong	 nature	 allows	 it	 to
forego	all	ornament.	It	chooses	plain	white.	With	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	joining	it,	it	succeeds	in	carrying
out	its	wish	for	simplicity.

NOTE.	The	relationships	of	correspondence	and	holding	together	appear	in	this	hexagram.	The	six	in
the	fourth	place	and	the	nine	at	the	beginning	are	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence;	the	nine	at	the
beginning	leaves	the	carriage	and	goes	toward	the	six	in	the	fourth	place,	which	sees	it	approaching	as	a
winged	horse.	The	second	line	holds	together	with	the	third,	so	also	the	fifth	with	the	top	line.	Thus	all	of
the	 lines	 are	 related	 in	 one	 way	 or,	 another,	 and	 in	 such	 a	 manner	 that	 it	 is	 always	 a	 reciprocal
relationship	 between	 a	 firm	 and	 a	 yielding	 line	 that	 produces	 grace.	 Also	 to	 be	 noted	 is	 a	 tendency
throughout	the	hexagram	to	counteract	overemphasis	of	form	by	means	of	content.



23.	Po	/	Splitting	Apart

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	at	the	top.	Although	the	dark	force	splinters	the	light,	the	light
principle	cannot	be	wholly	split	apart;	therefore	it	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
When	one	goes	too	far	in	adornment,	success	exhausts	itself.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of

SPLITTING	APART.	Splitting	apart	means	ruin.
Miscellaneous	Notes
SPLITTING	APART	means	decay.

The	thought	here,	taken	together	with	that	in	the	next	hexagram,	shows	the	connection	between	decay
and	resurrection.	Fruit	must	decay	before	new	seed	can	develop.

The	 sinking	 tendency	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 very	 strong.	 Both	 nuclear	 trigrams	 as	 well	 as	 the	 lower
primary	trigram	are	K’un,	whose	movement	is	downward.	In	contrast	with	this	the	upper	primary	trigram
Kên	stands	still,	without	motion.	This	 leads	to	a	 loosening	of	the	structure.	The	tendency	of	the	five	yin
lines	is	to	bring	about	the	downfall	of	the	yang	line	at	the	top,	in	that	they	sink	down	and	thus	take	the
ground	 from	 under	 it.	 Here	 too	 the	 fundamental	 trend	 of	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 is	 expressed:	 the	 light
principle	is	represented	as	invincible	because	in	its	sinking	it	creates	new	life,	as	does	a	grain	of	wheat
when	it	sinks	into	the	earth.

THE	JUDGMENT
SPLITTING	APART.	It	does	not	further	one
To	go	anywhere.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
SPLITTING	APART	means	ruin.	The	yielding	changes	the	firm.
“It	does	not	further	one	to	go	anywhere.”	Inferior	people	increase.
Devotion	and	keeping	still	result	from	contemplating	the	image.	The	superior	man	takes	heed	of

the	alternation	of	increase	and	decrease,	fullness	and	emptiness;	for	it	is	the	course	of	heaven.
The	yielding	element	changes	the	strong	by	imperceptible	gradual	influence.	The	yin	lines	are	about	to

increase.	This	gives	us	the	attitude	of	the	superior	man	in	such	times,	an	attitude	that	derives	from	the
two	trigrams.	In	accordance	with	the	attribute	of	the	trigram	K’un,	he	is	devoted;	in	accordance	with	that
of	Kên	he	 is	calm,	which	means	that	he	undertakes	nothing,	because	the	time	is	not	yet	come.	Thus	he
submits	to	the	course	of	heaven,	which	alternates	between	decrease	and	increase,	in	that	whatever	is	full
decreases	and	whatever	is	empty	increases.

THE	IMAGE
The	mountain	rests	on	the	earth:
The	image	of	SPLITTING	APART.
Thus	those	above	can	ensure	their	position
Only	by	giving	generously	to	those	below.

The	broader	the	base	of	the	mountain,	the	less	is	it	liable	to	splitting	apart.	Here	it	is	not	so	much	the
condition	of	splitting	apart	that	is	set	forth	as	the	condition	that	can	prevent	it.	Hence	also	it	 is	not	the
waning	of	the	light	principle	and	the	waxing	of	the	shadowy	that	are	to	be	considered,	but	the	solidity	of
the	foundation.	Through	generous	giving,	such	as	lies	in	the	nature	of	the	earth	(K’un),	an	assured	calm,
such	as	lies	in	the	nature	of	the	mountain	(Kên),	is	attained.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	The	leg	of	the	bed	is	split.
Those	who	persevere	are	destroyed.
Misfortune.
b)	“The	leg	of	the	bed	is	split,”	in	order	to	destroy	those	below.

The	position	at	 the	beginning,	as	 the	 lowest	place,	means	 the	 leg.	What	 is	 split	 is	 the	 resting	place,
hence	the	image	of	a	bed.	The	splitting	begins	below.	Therein	lies	the	danger.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	The	bed	is	split	at	the	edge.
Those	who	persevere	are	destroyed.
Misfortune.
b)	“The	bed	is	split	at	the	edge,”	because	one	has	no	comrade.

The	 splitting	 apart	 mounts	 upward	 from	 the	 leg	 of	 the	 bed.	 Now	 the	 edge	 is	 splitting.	 This	 line	 is
isolated;	 it	 is	neither	 in	 the	relationship	of	correspondence	 to	 the	 lines	around	 it	nor	 in	 that	of	holding
together.	Already	the	attack	is	emerging	from	concealment	into	the	open.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	He	splits	with	them.	No	blame.
b)	“He	splits	with	them.	No	blame.”	He	loses	the	neighbor	above	and	the	one	below.



This	 line	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 top	 and	 quarrels	 with	 its
environment	because	it	remains	loyal	to	these	original	ties.	Because	of	this	relation	with	the	nine	at	the
top,	 the	 line	becomes	 separated	 from	 the	 two	neighboring	 lines,	with	which	 there	 is	no	 relationship	of
holding	together.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	bed	is	split	up	to	the	skin.
Misfortune.
b)	“The	bed	is	split	up	to	the	skin.	Misfortune.”	This	is	a	serious	and	immediate	misfortune.

The	trigram	K’un	below	represents	the	bed,	the	resting	place.	The	trigram	Kên	above	represents	the
person	 resting.	Here	 the	 splitting	 spreads	 from	 the	 resting	place	 to	 the	person	 resting	on	 it;	 therefore
misfortune	is	directly	at	hand.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	A	shoal	of	fishes.	Favor	comes	through	the	court	ladies.
Everything	acts	to	further.
b)	“Favor	comes	through	the	court	ladies.”	In	the	end	this	is	not	a	mistake.

When	this	line	changes,	the	upper	trigram	becomes	Sun,	which	means	fish	(the	fish	is	associated	with
the	shadowy	principle).	The	line	is	in	the	ruler’s	place.	Here,	however,	since	the	activity	of	the	yin	power
becomes	 clearly	 manifest,	 it	 represents	 a	 queen,	 not	 a	 prince.	 The	 line	 stands	 in	 the	 relationship	 of
holding	 together	with	 the	 top	 line,	hence	 there	 is	no	hostile	activity;	on	 the	contrary,	at	 the	peak	of	 its
influence	it	subordinates	itself	to	the	yang	line,	which	it	approaches	while	leading	the	other	four	yin	lines
as	though	they	were	a	shoal	of	fishes.	These	friendly	relationships	are	represented	in	terms	of	the	ruler’s
relationship	to	the	court	ladies	and	his	queen.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	There	is	a	large	fruit	still	uneaten.
The	superior	man	receives	a	carriage.
The	house	of	the	inferior	man	is	split	apart.
b)	“The	superior	man	receives	a	carriage.”	He	is	carried	by	the	people.
“The	house	of	the	inferior	man	is	split	apart”:	he	ends	up	as	useless.

The	one	strong	line	at	the	top,	containing	the	seed	of	the	future,	is	seen	in	the	image	of	a	large	fruit.
K’un	means	 a	 carriage.	 The	 collapse	 of	 the	 line	 through	 its	 change	 into	 a	 yin	 line	 is	 compared	 to	 the
collapse	of	an	inferior	man’s	hut.	The	line	is,	so	to	speak,	the	roof	of	the	whole	hexagram.	When	it	falls
apart	the	whole	collapses.



24.	Fu	/	Return	(The	Turning	Point)

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	at	the	beginning.	This	is	the	line	referred	to	by	the	Commentary
on	the	Decision	in	the	statement,	“The	firm	returns.”

The	Sequence
Things	 cannot	 be	 destroyed	 once	 and	 for	 all.	When	 what	 is	 above	 is	 completely	 split	 apart,	 it

returns	below.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	RETURN.
Miscellaneous	Notes
RETURN	means	coming	back.
Appended	Judgments
RETURN	is	the	stem	of	character.	RETURN	is	small,	yet	different	from	external	things.	RETURN

leads	to	self-knowledge.
The	 hexagram	 of	 RETURN,	 applied	 to	 character	 formation,	 contains	 various	 suggestions.	 The	 light

principle	returns:	thus	the	hexagram	counsels	turning	away	from	the	confusion	of	external	things,	turning
back	to	one’s	inner	light.	There,	in	the	depths	of	the	soul,	one	sees	the	Divine,	the	One.	It	is	indeed	only
germinal,	no	more	than	a	beginning,	a	potentiality,	but	as	such	clearly	to	be	distinguished	from	all	objects.
To	know	this	One	means	to	know	oneself	 in	relation	to	the	cosmic	forces.	For	this	One	is	the	ascending
force	of	life	in	nature	and	in	man.
This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one,	and	the	movement	tends	very	strongly	upward	from

below—from	the	trigram	Chên—going	through	the	sinking	trigram	K’un.
THE	JUDGMENT
RETURN.	Success.
Going	out	and	coming	in	without	error.
Friends	come	without	blame.
To	and	fro	goes	the	way.
On	the	seventh	day	comes	return.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
Commentary	on	the	Decision

“RETURN	has	success.”	The	firm	returns.
Movement	and	action	through	devotion.	Therefore,	“Going	out	and	coming	in	without	error.”
“Friends	come	without	blame.	To	and	fro	goes	the	way.	On	the	seventh	day	comes	return.”	This	is

the	course	of	heaven.
“It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.”	The	firm	is	on	the	increase.
In	the	hexagram	of	RETURN	one	sees	the	mind	of	heaven	and	earth.

This	hexagram	expresses	the	idea	that	the	light	force	is	the	creative	principle	of	heaven	and	earth.	It	is
an	eternal	cyclic	movement,	from	which	life	comes	forth	again	just	at	the	moment	when	it	appears	to	have
been	 completely	 vanquished.	 Through	 the	 re-entrance	 of	 the	 yang	 line	 into	 the	 hexagram	 below,
movement	develops	(Chên,	the	lower	trigram),	and	this	movement	acts	through	devotion	(K’un,	the	upper
trigram).	Going	out	and	coming	in	are	without	error.	The	yang	force	has	 indeed	gone	(cf.	 the	foregoing
hexagram,	Po),	but	like	a	fruit	falling	to	earth,	it	has	not	disappeared	without	a	trace;	it	has	left	an	effect
behind.	This	effect	shows	itself	in	the	re-entrance	of	the	yang	line.	The	friends	who	come	are	either	the
other	yang	lines	about	to	enter	the	hexagram	after	this	first	line	(according	to	Ch’êng	Tzu),	or	the	five	yin
lines,	which	meet	the	yang	line	cordially.	The	way	of	yang	goes	to	and	fro,	up	and	down.	After	the	light
force	begins	to	diminish	in	Kou,	COMING	TO	MEET	(44),	it	returns	again	in	the	hexagram	Fu,	after	seven
changes.
“It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go,”	that	is,	to	undertake	something.	Both	this	sentence	and	the

image	of	the	friends	occur	in	the	text	of	the	second	hexagram,	K’un,	THE	RECEPTIVE.
THE	IMAGE
Thunder	within	the	earth:
The	image	of	THE	TURNING	POINT.
Thus	the	kings	of	antiquity	closed	the	passes
At	the	time	of	solstice.
Merchants	and	strangers	did	not	go	about,
And	the	ruler
Did	not	travel	through	the	provinces.

The	hexagram	is	associated	with	the	month	of	the	winter	solstice.	From	this	are	drawn	the	conclusions
resulting	in	the	right	behavior	at	the	time	when	the	returning	yang	force	is	still	weak	and	must	therefore
be	strengthened	by	rest.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Return	from	a	short	distance.
No	need	for	remorse.
Great	good	fortune.



b)	“Return	from	a	short	distance”:	thus	one	cultivates	one’s	character.
The	 strong	 line	 at	 the	 bottom	 turns	 back	 at	 once.	 The	 first	 line	 of	 Chên	 is	 very	mobile;	 hence	 the

immediate	turnabout	before	going	too	far.	Confucius	says	about	this	line:
“Yen	 Hui	 is	 one	 who	 will	 surely	 attain	 it.	 If	 he	 has	 a	 fault,	 he	 never	 fails	 to	 recognize	 it;	 having

recognized	it,	he	never	commits	the	error	a	second	time.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	‘Return	from	a
short	distance.	No	need	for	remorse,	Great	good	fortune.’”

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Quiet	return.	Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	a	quiet	return	depends	on	subordination	to	a	good	man.

This	 line	is	central	and	modest	(yielding),	and	stands	in	the	relationship	of	holding	together	with	the
ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	at	the	beginning.	The	good	fortune	depends	on	the	resulting	subordination
to	this	good	man.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Repeated	return.	Danger.	No	blame.
b)	The	danger	of	repeated	return	is,	in	its	essential	meaning,	deliverance	from	blame.

This	line	is	at	the	peak	of	movement.	This	points	to	a	repeated	turning	back.	The	first	turning	back	is
from	good	to	bad.	The	second	is	from	bad	to	good	once	more.	This	line	likewise	turns,	as	a	friend	to	the
nine	at	the	beginning.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Walking	in	the	midst	of	others,
One	returns	alone.
b)	“Walking	in	the	midst	of	others,	one	returns	alone,”	and	so	follows	the	right	way.

The	 fourth	 line	 is	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	upper	nuclear	 trigram	K’un;	 it	 is	moreover	 the	top	 line	of	 the
lower	nuclear	trigram	K’un	and	the	lowest	line	of	the	upper	primary	trigram	K’un.	In	a	word,	it	is	in	the
midst	of	weak	lines,	and	is	itself	compliant	and	in	a	weak	place.	One	might	infer	a	lack	of	initiative.	But
this	line	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	strong	nine	at	the	beginning,	hence	solitary	return.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Noblehearted	return.	No	remorse.
b)	“Noblehearted	return.	No	remorse.”	Central,	therefore	he	is	able	to	test	himself.

This	 line	 is	 actually	 very	 far	 away	 from	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning.	 But	 it	 is	 central;	 therefore	 it	 is
possible	for	it	to	test	itself	and	thus	to	find	a	way	of	turning	back	from	all	mistakes.	The	relationship	with
the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning	 is	 not	 suggested	 by	 any	 external	 ties,	 hence	 it	 represents	 noblehearted	 free
decision.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Missing	the	return.	Misfortune.
Misfortune	from	within	and	without.
If	armies	are	set	marching	in	this	way,
One	will	in	the	end	suffer	a	great	defeat,
Disastrous	for	the	ruler	of	the	country.
For	ten	years
It	will	not	be	possible	to	attack	again.
b)	The	misfortune	in	missing	the	return	lies	in	opposing	the	way	of	the	superior	man.

This	line	is	at	the	end	of	the	yin	lines,	hence	there	is	no	turning	back	for	it.	In	refusing	to	turn	back	it
defiantly	seeks	to	attain	its	objective	by	force,	thereby,	however,	owing	to	inner	and	outer	misfortune,	it
loses	for	a	long	time	all	possibility	of	recuperating.	The	top	line	in	the	hexagram	K’un,	THE	RECEPTIVE,
has	a	similar	judgment.
The	trigram	Chên	means	a	general,	K’un	means	crowd,	hence	“to	set	armies	marching.”	K’un	means

nation,	Chên	means	ruler.	Ten	is	the	number	belonging	to	the	earth.
NOTE.	Missing	the	return	(six	at	the	top)	is	the	opposite	of	return	from	a	short	distance	(nine	at	the

beginning).	The	first	line	is	not	far	off	and	comes	back.	Quiet	return	(six	in	the	second	place)	and	solitary
return	(six	in	the	fourth	place)	resemble	each	other;	both	lines	are	related	to	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.
Repeated	return	(six	in	the	third	place)	and	noblehearted	return	(six	in	the	fifth	place)	are	opposites:	in
the	one	there	is	going	back	and	forth,	the	other	shows	calm	consistency.



25.	Wu	Wang	/	Innocence	(The	Unexpected)

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	at	the	beginning	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	The	nine	at	the
beginning	is	the	first	movement	of	the	light	principle	as	well	as	the	first	movement	of	the	sincere	heart	of
man.	The	nine	in	the	fifth	place	symbolizes	the	essence	of	the	Creative,	as	well	as	the	tirelessness	of	the
supremely	sincere.	Therefore	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	firm	comes	from	without
and	becomes	the	ruler	within.”	This	refers	 to	 the	 first	 line.	And	 further:	“The	 firm	 is	 in	 the	middle	and
finds	correspondence.”	This	refers	to	the	fifth	line.

The	Sequence
By	turning	back	one	is	freed	of	guilt.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	INNOCENCE.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	UNEXPECTED	means	misfortune	from	without.

Innocence	 frees	 itself	 of	 mistakes,	 so	 that	 no	 misfortune	 of	 internal	 origin	 can	 overtake	 it.	 When
misfortune	comes	unexpectedly,	it	has	an	external	origin,	therefore	it	will	pass	again.

The	hexagram	has	a	very	strong	ascending	tendency;	both	 the	upper	and	the	 lower	 trigram	have	an
upward	 movement.	 This	 fact	 suggests	 movement	 in	 harmony	 with	 heaven,	 which	 is	 man’s	 true	 and
original	nature.	The	two	nuclear	trigrams,	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	mountain,	and	Sun,	the	Gentle,	wind	(tree),
yield	the	idea	of	the	functioning	and	development	of	the	primal	trends.

THE	JUDGMENT
INNOCENCE.	Supreme	success.
Perseverance	furthers.
If	someone	is	not	as	he	should	be,
He	has	misfortune,
And	it	does	not	further	him
To	undertake	anything.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
INNOCENCE.	 The	 firm	 comes	 from	 without	 and	 becomes	 the	 ruler	 within.	 Movement	 and

strength.	The	firm	is	in	the	middle	and	finds	correspondence.
“Great	success	through	correctness”:	this	is	the	will	of	heaven.
“If	someone	is	not	as	he	should	be,	he	has	misfortune,	and	it	does	not	further	him	to	undertake

anything.”	When	innocence	is	gone,	where	can	one	go?	When	the	will	of	heaven	does	not	protect	one,
can	one	do	anything?
The	firm	element	coming	from	without	is	the	lowest	line,	a	yang	line.	It	comes	from	heaven	(Ch’ien).

The	Receptive,	in	approaching	the	Creative	 for	 the	 first	 time,	receives	 the	 first	 line	of	Ch’ien	and	gives
birth	to	Chên,	the	eldest	son.	Applied	to	man,	this	means	that	he	receives	the	primal	divine	spirit	as	his
guide	 and	master.	 The	 attribute	 of	 the	 lower	 trigram,	Chên,	 is	movement,	 that	 of	 the	upper,	Ch’ien,	 is
strength.	The	firm	line	in	a	central	position	that	finds	correspondence	is	the	upper	ruler	of	the	hexagram,
the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	and	the	six	in	the	second	place	corresponds	with	it.	This	all	leads	to	success,
because	 it	 shows	man	 in	 the	 proper	 relationship	 to	 the	 divine,	 without	 ulterior	 designs	 and	 in	 primal
innocence.	 Thus	 man	 is	 in	 harmony	 with	 heavenly	 fate,	 the	 will	 of	 heaven,	 just	 as	 the	 lower	 trigram
harmonizes	in	movement	with	the	upper.

But	where	the	natural	state	is	not	this	state	of	innocence,	where	desires	and	ideas	are	astir,	misfortune
follows	of	inner	necessity.	This	hexagram	differs	from	P’i,	STANDSTILL,	only	in	having	a	firm	line	at	the
beginning.	If	this	should	lose	its	firmness,	the	whole	situation	would	change.1

THE	IMAGE
Under	heaven	thunder	rolls:
All	things	attain	the	natural	state	of	innocence.
Thus	the	kings	of	old,
Rich	in	virtue,	and	in	harmony	with	the	time,
Fostered	and	nourished	all	beings.

“Under	heaven	thunder	rolls:	all	things	attain	the	natural	state	of	innocence.”	This	image	is	explained
by	the	saying	in.	the	Discussion	of	the	Trigrams:	“God	comes	forth	in	the	sign	of	the	Arousing.”	This	is	the
beginning	of	all	life.	Here	we	have	the	Creative	above	in	association	with	movement:	The	upper	nuclear
trigram	is	wood,	the	lower	is	mountain.

“Rich	in	virtue”	refers	to	the	strength	of	the	Creative.	“The	time”	derives	from	the	trigram	Chên
(east	and	spring)—the	trigram	in	which	life	comes	forth.	Fostering	and	nourishing	are	indicated	by	the
nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain.	The	fact	that	this	influence	extends	to	everything	is	symbolized	by	the
nuclear	trigram	Sun,	meaning	wind	and	universal	penetration.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Innocent	behavior	brings	good	fortune.
b)	Innocent	behavior	attains	its	will.



Innocence	 is	symbolized	by	the	 light	character	of	 the	 line,	which	enters	as	ruler	below	the	two	dark
lines.	Coming	from	heaven,	it	bears	within	itself	the	warrant	of	success.	It	attains	its	goal	with	intuitive
certainty.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	If	one	does	not	count	on	the	harvest	while	plowing,
Nor	on	the	use	of	the	ground	while	clearing	it,
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
b)	Not	plowing	in	order	to	reap:	that	is,	one	does	not	seek	wealth.

The	 trigram	Chên	means	wood,	hence	a	plow,	and	 the	second	place	 is	 that	of	 the	 field.	The	nuclear
trigram	Kên	means	hand,	hence	the	image	of	clearing	a	field.

This	line	is	central	and	correct.	On	the	one	hand,	it	is	in	the	relationship	of	holding	together	with	the
nine	at	the	beginning;	on	the	other,	it	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.
But	 being	 central	 and	 correct,	 it	 does	 not	 allow	 itself	 to	 be	 deflected	 by	 these	 relationships.	 It	 is	 the
lowest	 line	 in	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	 hence	 it	 keeps	 a	 calm	mind;	 but	 it	 is	 also	 in	 the
middle	of	the	trigram	Chên,	movement,	hence	may	undertake	something.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Undeserved	misfortune.
The	cow	that	was	tethered	by	someone
Is	the	wanderer’s	gain,	the	citizen’s	loss.
b)	If	the	wanderer	gets	the	cow,	it	is	the	citizen’s	loss.

This	line	stands	at	the	high	point	of	movement	and	at	the	beginning	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	wind.
Therefore	 it	 is	 in	 its	movements	not	 in	harmony	with	 the	 time.	 It	 is	equally	 far	 from	both	 rulers	of	 the
hexagram	 and	 hence	 does	 not	 find	 the	 right	 connection	 anywhere.	 Through	 change	 in	 this	 line,	 the
trigram	Li,	meaning	cow,	develops	below.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	who	can	be	persevering
Remains	without	blame.
b)	“He	who	can	be	persevering	remains	without	blame,”	for	he	possesses	firmly.

The	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	originally	neither	correct	nor	central.	However,	as	the	lowest	line	in	the
trigram	Ch’ien,	it	is	able	to	preserve	the	firmness	belonging	to	the	Creative.	By	this	means	it	remains	free
of	the	blame	otherwise	to	be	feared.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Use	no	medicine	in	an	illness
Incurred	through	no	fault	of	your	own.
It	will	pass	of	itself.
b)	One	should	not	try	an	unknown	medicine.

Medicine	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 two	 nuclear	 trigrams,	 wood	 and	 stone	 (mountain).	 The	 illness	 is
innocently	 incurred	because	this	 line,	as	 the	middle	 line	of	 the	Creative,	represents	a	person	by	nature
free	of	illness;	that	he	appears	ill	comes	from	his	way	of	taking	the	illnesses	of	others	upon	himself.	His
central,	 correct,	 and	 ruling	 position	 predisposes	 him	 to	 allow	 the	 ills	 of	 others,	 vicariously	 taken	 upon
himself,	to	work	themselves	out	in	him.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Innocent	action	brings	misfortune.
Nothing	furthers.
b)	Action	without	reflection	brings	about	the	evil	of	bewilderment.

This	 line	 is	related	to	the	weak,	restless	six	 in	the	third	place.	Thoughtless	action	brings	misfortune.
The	 line	 is	 at	 the	end,	 in	 a	 time	when	action	 is	no	 longer	 appropriate.	To	go	on	 thoughtlessly	 leads	 to
bewilderment.	The	line	describes	a	situation	similar	to	that	of	the	top	line	of	THE	CREATIVE.

NOTE.	In	this	hexagram	the	six	lines	are	all	innocent,	that	is,	naïve,	without	ulterior	motives.	The	nine
at	the	beginning	is	in	its	appropriate	place	and	is	the	ruler	of	the	trigram	of	movement;	this	indicates	that
the	time	has	come	to	act.	Hence	action	brings	good	fortune.	The	nine	at	the	top	is	not	in	the	right	place
and	 stands	 outermost	 in	 the	 trigram	 Ch’ien.	 The	 time	 to	 act	 has	 already	 passed.	 Hence	 action,	 even
though	innocent,	brings	misfortune.	Everything	depends	on	the	time.	The	line	at	the	beginning	has	good
fortune,	the	second	is	favorable;	this	is	due	to	the	time.	The	third	line	bears	an	augury	of	misfortune,	the
fifth	of	illness,	the	top	line	of	misfortune.	All	this	does	not	happen	by	plan,	but	is	likewise	the	result	of	the
time	conditions.	 It	 is	possible	 for	 the	 first	and	second	 lines	 to	advance.	The	 time	has	come	 for	 them	to
move.	The	fourth	should	remain	steadfast,	the	fifth	should	use	no	medicine,	the	top	line	has	misfortune	if
it	acts:	all	this	indicates	that	for	these	lines	the	time	has	come	to	remain	quiet.



26.	Ta	Ch’u	/	The	Taming	Power	of	the	Great

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	six	 in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	at	the	top.	These	are	the	 lines
referred	to	when	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	firm	ascends	and	honors	the	worthy.”

The	Sequence
When	innocence	is	present,	it	is	possible	to	tame.	Hence	there	follows	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF

THE	GREAT.
Holding	fast	to	heavenly	virtue	is	the	prerequisite	for	innocence.	On	the	other	hand,	innocence	is	the

indispensable	condition	for	being	able	to	hold	fast	to	pristine	heavenly	virtue.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT	depends	on	the	time.

The	movements	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams	 are	 toward	 each	 other.	 The	 Creative	 below	 presses	 powerfully
upward,	and	Keeping	Still	above	holds	it	fast.	The	nuclear	trigrams	Chên	and	Tui	also	have	a	tendency	to
rise,	the	upper	more	so	than	the	lower.	These	are	the	latent	forces	that	are	intensified	by	the	holding	fast.
The	two	weak	lines	occupying	the	ruler’s	and	the	minister’s	place	restrain	the	strong	lines	below,	while
showing	 recognition	 and	 liberality	 toward	 the	 strong	 line	 above.	 This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the
preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.
Perseverance	furthers.
Not	eating	at	home	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.	Firmness	and	strength.	Genuineness	and	truth.	Brilliance

and	light.	Daily	he	renews	his	virtue.
The	firm	ascends	and	honors	the	worthy.	He	is	able	to	keep	strength	still;	this	is	great	correctness.
“Not	eating	at	home	brings	good	fortune,”	for	people	of	worth	are	nourished.
“It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water,”	because	one	finds	correspondence	in	heaven.

The	upper	trigram	Kên	is	firm,	the	lower,	Ch’ien,	is	strong;	the	upper	is	genuine,	the	lower	is	true:	the
upper	 is	brilliant,	 the	 lower	 light.	Thus	 the	 two	 trigrams	complement	each	other.	Through	keeping	still
(Kên),	the	powers	of	character	(Ch’ien)	are	so	strengthened	that	a	daily	renewal	takes	place.	This	refers
to	 the	 effect	 of	 the	 personality.	 Here	 the	 first	 meaning	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 given—keeping	 still	 and
collecting	oneself,
The	 firm	element	 that	ascends	 is	 the	nine	at	 the	top.	 It,	mounts	above	the	six	 in	 the	 fifth	place—the

place	 of	 the	 ruler—and	 this	 ruler	 honors	 it	 in	 its	 ascent	 because	 it	 is	 worthy.	 The	 upper	 trigram	Kên,
Keeping	Still,	is	able	to	hold	fast	the	lower,	Ch’ien,	the	strong.	This	explains	the	words	of	the	Judgment:
“Perseverance	 furthers.”	Here	we	have	 the	second	meaning	of	 the	hexagram—holding	 fast	and	keeping
still.
Not	eating	at	home,	that	 is,	entering	public	service,	brings	good	fortune,	because	the	six	 in	the	fifth

place	represents	a	ruler	who	nourishes	people	of	worth.	This	gives	the	third	meaning—holding	fast	and
nourishing.

“It	 furthers	one	 to	cross	 the	great	water.”	This	 idea	 is	suggested	by	 the	 two	nuclear	 trigrams—
Chên,	which	also	means	wood,	over	Tui,	lake.	This	dangerous	action	is	possible	because	the	ruler	of
the	hexagram,	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	place,	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	of	 correspondence	 to	 the	nine	 in	 the
second	place,	the	central	line	of	the	lower	trigram,	heaven	(Ch’ien).
THE	IMAGE
Heaven	within	the	mountain:
The	image	of	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man	acquaints	himself	with	many	sayings	of	antiquity
And	many	deeds	of	the	past,
In	order	to	strengthen	his	character	thereby.

Heaven	 (Ch’ien)	 points	 to	 character,	 virtue.	 Strengthening	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	mountain	 (Kên).	 The
means	 to	 this	 strengthening	 of	 character	 are	 hidden	 in	 the	 nuclear	 trigrams:	 the	 lower,	 Tui,	 mouth,
suggests	words;	the	upper,	Chên,	movement,	suggests	deeds.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Danger	is	at	hand.	It	furthers	one	to	desist.
b)	“Danger	is	at	hand.	It	furthers	one	to	desist.”	Thus	one	does	not	expose	oneself	to	danger.

This	 strong	 line,	which	 is	 in	 its	 proper	 place,	would	 like	 to	 advance.	 But	 it	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of
correspondence	 to	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fourth	place,	which	 is	 one	of	 the	 two	obstructing	 lines.	This	 indicates
danger	that	would	hold	it	back	if	it	should	try	to	advance;	but	since	the	line	is	still	just	at	the	beginning,	it
allows	itself	to	be	held	back	and	so	escapes	the	danger.



Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	The	axletrees	are	taken	from	the	wagon.
b)	“The	axletrees	are	taken	from	the	wagon.”	In	the	middle	there	is	no	blame.

Ch’ien	is	round,	hence	the	image	of	the	wheel.	Tui,	the	nuclear	trigram,	indicates	breaking.	The	nine	in
the	 second	place	 is	 central,	 hence	able	 to	 control	 itself.	 It	 is	held	back	by	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	place,	 to
which	it	is	related.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	A	good	horse	that	follows	others.
Awareness	of	danger,
With	perseverance,	furthers.
Practice	chariot	driving	and	armed	defense	daily.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
b)	“It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.”	The	will	of	the	one	above	is	in	agreement.

Ch’ien	 is	 a	 good	horse;	 the	nuclear	 trigram	Chên,	 in	which	 this	 is	 the	beginning	 line,	 is	movement,
hence	 advance.	 This	 line	 stands	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 congruity	 to	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 top,	 hence	 the
agreement	in	will	between	them.	But	the	fourth	and	the	fifth	line	still	create	separation	and	danger,	which
must	 be	 borne	 in	 mind.	 The	 chariot	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 trigram	 Ch’ien,	 the	 weapons	 by	 the	 nuclear
trigram	Tui,	meaning	metal	and	breaking.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	headboard	of	a	young	bull.
Great	good	fortune.
b)	The	great	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	consists	in	the	fact	that	it	has	joy.

This	 line	 constitutes	 the	 horns	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Tui,	 which	 to	 be	 sure	 means	 sheep	 and	 not
horned	cattle.	The	 line	easily	 restrains	 the	nine	at	 the	beginning	before	 it	 has	begun	 to	be	dangerous,
hence	the	joy.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	tusk	of	a	gelded	boar.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	consists	in	the	fact	that	it	has	blessing.

Another	interpretation	reads:	“The	tethering	post	of	a	young	pig.”	The	meaning	is	doubtless	that	of	an
indirect	check	before	the	danger	grows	formidable.	An	old	commentary	connects	the	pig	of	this	 line,	as
well	as	the	bull	of	the	preceding	line,	with	sacrificial	rites,	hence	the	good	fortune	and	the	blessing.	In	any
case,	the	blessing	comes	from	the	relationship	of	this	line	to	the	middle	line	of	the	lower	trigram,	heaven.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	One	attains	the	way	of	heaven.	Success.
b)	“One	attains	the	way	of	heaven.”	Truth	works	in	the	great.

The	top	line	is	honored	as	a	sage	by	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	It	stands	in	the	relationship	of	congruity
to	 the	nine	 in	 the	 third	place,	which	 is,	however,	 the	 top	 line	of	 the	 trigram	Ch’ien,	heaven.	The	upper
trigram	Kên	means	a	way.
NOTE.	 In	 this	 hexagram,	 the	 relationships	 between	 the	 yin	 and	 the	 yang	 lines	 are	 not	 those	 of

correspondence	 and	 furtherance,	 but,	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 character	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 those	 of
obstruction.	The	lines	of	the	lower	trigram	are	obstructed,	those	of	the	upper	trigram	are	the	obstructors.
Only	 the	 third	 and	 the	 top	 line,	 which,	 as	 two	 yang	 lines,	 are	 in	 harmony,	 are	 free	 of	 the	 idea	 of
obstruction.
The	persons	represented	by	the	first	two	lines	are	still	eating	at	home	and	still	obstructed	in	crossing

the	great	water.	The	fourth	and	fifth	lines	operate	by	obstructing	the	two	misbehaving	lines—this	is	easy
for	 the	 one,	 more	 difficult	 for	 the	 other.	 The	 third	 line	 advances,	 though	 with	 caution	 and	 under
difficulties.	The	top	line	alone	has	a	clear	path	ahead,	and	the	obstacles	disappear.	It	stands	for	the	person
of	worth	who	can	achieve	great	things	and	who	is	nourished.



27.	I	/	The	Corners	of	the	Mouth

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	six	 in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	at	the	top.	These	are	the	 lines
referred	 to	 in	 the	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision:	 “He	 provides	 nourishment	 for	 men	 of	 worth	 and	 thus
reaches	the	whole	people.”

The	Sequence
When	things	are	held	fast,	there	is	provision	of	nourishment.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of

THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH.	“The	corners	of	the	mouth”	means	the	providing	of	nourishment.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH	means	providing	nourishment	for	what	is	right.

The	 two	 primary	 trigrams	 are	 opposed	 in	 movement.	 Kên,	 the	 upper,	 stands	 still;	 Chên,	 the	 lower,
moves	upward.	This	suggests	the	jaws	and	teeth.	The	upper	jaw	is	immobile,	the	lower	moves;	hence	the
designation	of	the	hexagram	as	THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH.	In	contrast	to	Hsü,	WAITING	(5),	which
also	deals	with	provision	of	nourishment	but	emphasizes	man’s	dependence	on	nourishment,	the	theme	of
the	hexagram	I	is	rather	the	human	role	in	the	providing	of	nourishment.	A	secondary	meaning	is	that	of
providing	nourishment	first	for	men	of	worth,	in	order	that	thereby	the	people	also	may	be	nourished.	The
two	hexagrams	therefore	present	provision	of	nourishment	as	a	natural	process	(Hsü,	WAITING)	and	as	a
social	 problem	 (I,	 THE	 CORNERS	 OF	 THE	 MOUTH).	 A	 similar	 contrast	 obtains	 between	 the	 two
hexagrams	denoting	nourishment	in	itself—Ching,	THE	WELL	(48),	the	water	necessary	for	nourishment,
and	Ting,	THE	CALDRON	(50),	the	food	necessary	for	nourishment.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Pay	heed	to	the	providing	of	nourishment
And	to	what	a	man	seeks
To	fill	his	own	mouth	with.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“THE	 CORNERS	 OF	 THE	 MOUTH.	 Perseverance	 brings	 good	 fortune.”	 If	 one	 provides

nourishment	for	what	is	right,	good	fortune	comes.
“Pay	heed	to	the	providing	of	nourishment,”	that	is,	pay	heed	to	what	a	man	provides	nourishment

for.
“To	what	he	seeks	to	fill	his	own	mouth	with,”	that	is,	pay	heed	to	what	a	man	nourishes	himself

with.
Heaven	and	earth	provide	nourishment	for	all	beings.	The	holy	man	provides	nourishment	for	men

of	worth	and	thus	reaches	the	whole	people.	Truly	great	is	the	time	of	PROVIDING	NOURISHMENT.
As	 an	 image	 the	 hexagram	 is	 conceived	 as	 a	 whole—as	 the	 image	 of	 an	 open	 mouth;	 consequently

there	is	no	need	of	explaining	how	it	came	to	mean	provision	of	nourishment.	But	it	stresses	the	idea	that
as	regards	the	manner	of	providing	nourishment,	everything	depends	on	its	being	in	harmony	with	what	is
right.	In	accord	with	the	character	of	the	two	trigrams—movement	and	keeping	still—there	is	no	relation
of	correspondence	between	the	relevant	lines	of	the	lower	and	the	upper	trigram.	The	lower	trigram	seeks
nourishment	for	itself,	the	upper	affords	nourishment	for	others.

THE	IMAGE
At	the	foot	of	the	mountain,	thunder:
The	image	of	PROVIDING	NOURISHMENT.
Thus	the	superior	man	is	careful	of	his	words
And	temperate	in	eating	and	drinking.

Thunder	is	the	trigram	in	which	God	comes	forth;	the	mountain	is	the	trigram	in	which	all	things	are
completed.	 This	 is	 the	 image	 of	 PROVIDING	 NOURISHMENT.	 From	 the	 hexagram	 as	 a	 whole,	 as
representing	an	open	mouth	are	derived	the	movements	of	the	mouth,	speech	and	the	taking	in	of	food.
This	movement	corresponds	with	the	character	of	 the	trigram	Chên.	 It	must	be	moderated	 if	 it	 is	 to	be
correct.	This	is	in	correspondence	with	the	character	of	the	trigram	Kên.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	You	let	your	magic	tortoise	go,
And	look	at	me	with	the	corners	of	your	mouth	drooping.
Misfortune.
b)	“You	…	look	at	me	with	the	corners	of	your	mouth	drooping”:	this	is	really	not	to	be	respected.

Structurally	the	whole	hexagram	recalls	the	trigram	Li,	the	Clinging,	hence	the	image	of	a	tortoise.
The	 hexagram	 contains	 three	 ideas—nourishing	 oneself,	 nourishing	 others,	 and	 being	 nourished	 by

others.	The	strong	line	at	the	top,	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	provides	nourishment	for	others.	The	weak
middle	 lines	are	obliged	 to	depend	on	others	 to	provide	 them	with	nourishment.	The	strong	 line	below
should	indeed	be	able	to	provide	nourishment	for	itself	(the	magic	tortoise	needs	no	earthly	food	but	can
nourish	itself	on	air).	Instead,	however,	it	too	moves	toward	the	general	source	of	nourishment	and	wants



to	be	fed	with	the	rest.	This	is	contemptible	and	disastrous.	“You”	is	the	nine	at	the	beginning,	“me”	is	the
nine	at	the	top.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Turning	to	the	summit	for	nourishment,
Deviating	from	the	path
To	seek	nourishment	from	the	hill.
Continuing	to	do	this	brings	misfortune.
b)	If	the	six	in	the	second	place	continues	to	do	this,	it	brings	misfortune,	because	in	going	it	loses

its	place	among	its	kind.
The	six	in	the	second	place	could	seek	nourishment	from	its	peer,	the	nine	at	the	beginning.	Instead,	it

turns	 aside	 from	 this	 path	 and	 seeks	 nourishment	 at	 the	 summit,	 that	 is,	 from	 the	 upper	 ruler	 of	 the
hexagram	(the	upper	trigram	is	Kên,	mountain).	This	brings	misfortune.

Another	interpretation	reads:	“To	seek	to	be	provided	with	nourishment	the	other	way	round	(by	the
nine	at	the	beginning)	or,	leaving	the	path,	to	seek	nourishment	from	the	hill	(the	nine	at	the	top)	brings
misfortune.”

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Turning	away	from	nourishment.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
Do	not	act	thus	for	ten	years.
Nothing	serves	to	further.
b)	“Do	not	act	thus	for	ten	years,”	because	it	is	all	too	contrary	to	the	right	way.

This	line	also,	standing	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	Chên,	movement,	seeks	nourishment	from	the	nine	at
the	top	instead	of	from	the	nine	at	the	bottom.	“Ten	years”	is	implied	by	the	nuclear	trigram	K’un,	whose
number	 is	 ten.	 The	 reason	 why	 this	 behavior	 is	 so	 severely	 criticized	 is	 that	 the	 line	 seeks	 personal
advantages	on	the	basis	of	its	relationship	of	correspondence,	which	is	not	valid	in	this	hexagram.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Turning	to	the	summit
For	provision	of	nourishment
Brings	good	fortune.
Spying	about	with	sharp	eyes
Like	a	tiger	with	insatiable	craving.
No	blame.
b)	The	good	fortune	in	turning	to	the	summit	to	be	provided	with	nourishment	inheres	in	the	fact

that	the	one	above	spreads	light.
This	line	likewise	turns	to	the	nine	at	the	top	to	be	provided	with	nourishment,	but	because	it	belongs

to	the	same	trigram	as	the	latter,	this	brings	good	fortune,	in	contrast	to	the	fate	of	the	six	in	the	second
place.	“Spying	about	with	sharp	eyes”	derives	from	the	form	of	the	hexagram,	which	is	reminiscent	of	Li.
The	trigram	Li	also	means	eye.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Turning	away	from	the	path.
To	remain	persevering	brings	good	fortune.
One	should	not	cross	the	great	water.
b)	The	good	fortune	in	remaining	persevering	comes	from	following	the	one	above	devotedly.

This	line	is	in	the	place	of	the	ruler,	but	as	a	yielding,	submissive	line,	it	stands	in	the	relationship	of
receiving	to	the	strong	line	above	it.	Hence	it	devotedly	places	itself	below	the	latter.	(When	the	hexagram
changes	 into	 the	 next	 one,	 the	 upper	 trigram	 Kên	 becomes	 Tui,	 lake.	 The	 fifth	 line	 then	 gets	 into	 the
middle	of	the	water,	hence	it	is	not	favorable	to	cross	the	great	water.)

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	source	of	nourishment.
Awareness	of	danger	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
b)	“The	source	of	nourishment.	Awareness	of	danger	brings	good	fortune.”	It	has	great	blessing.

The	danger	comes	from	the	responsibility	of	the	position	at	the	top	of	the	hexagram	and	from	the	fact
that,	in	addition,	the	line	receives	authority	and	honor	from	the	yielding	ruler	in	the	fifth	place.	But	in	this
position	 it	 dispenses	 great	 blessing.	 Being	 thus	 aware	 of	 the	 danger,	 it	 is	 able	 to	 undertake	 great
enterprises,	such	as	crossing	the	great	water.	 (When	the	hexagram	changes	 into	the	following	one,	this
line	is	on	the	surface	of	Tui,	the	lake,	hence,	unlike	the	preceding	line,	not	in	danger	of	drowning.)



28.	Ta	Kuo	/	Preponderance	of	the	Great

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	second	place	and	the	nine	in	the	fourth.	The	nine	in	the
second	place	is	firm,	central,	and	not	too	heavy.	The	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	a	beam	that	does	not	sag	to
the	breaking	point.

The	Sequence
Without	 provision	 of	 nourishment	 one	 cannot	 move;	 hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.
Nourishing	without	putting	to	use	finally	evokes	movement.	Movement	without	end	leads	finally	too	far,

to	overweighting.
Miscellaneous	Notes
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	is	the	peak.

The	peak	refers	to	the	image	of	the	ridgepole	mentioned	in	the	Judgment.	The	hexagram	shows	great
strength	within.	Both	the	nuclear	trigrams	are	Ch’ien,	whose	attribute	is	strength.	But	underneath	is	the
gentle	Sun,	 penetrating	 indeed,	 but	 ethereal	 as	well,	while	 above	 is	 the	 joyous	Tui,	 the	 lake.	 Thus	 the
outer	ends	are	not	equal	to	the	weight	of	the	strong	structure	within;	hence	the	great	in	preponderance.
This	hexagram	is	the	opposite	of	the	preceding	one.

Appended	Judgments
In	ancient	times	the	dead	were	buried	by	covering	them	thickly	with	brushwood	and	placing	them

in	the	open	country,	without	burial	mound	or	grove	of	trees.	The	period	of	mourning	had	no	definite
duration.	The	holy	men	of	a	later	time	introduced	inner	and	outer	coffins	instead.	They	probably	took
this	from—the	hexagram	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.
The	hexagram	represents	wood	that	has	penetrated	below	ground	water;	this	gives	the	coffin	 image.

Another	explanation—holds	that	the	two	yin	lines	(above	and	below)	represent	the	earth	and	trees	of	the
burial	place,	while	the	yang	lines	between	indicate	the	coffin.	When	the	dead	are	thus	well	cared	for,	they
enter	 (Sun)	 the	 earth	 and	 are	 happy	 (Tui).	 This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 preceding	 one	 in	 this
further	respect,	that	the	former	shows	the	provisions	of	nourishment	for	the	living,	and	the	present	one
shows	the	care	provided	for	the	dead.

THE	JUDGMENT
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.
The	ridgepole	sags	to	the	breaking	point.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
Success.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.	The	great	preponderates.	The	ridgepole	sags	to	the	breaking

point	because	beginning	and	end	are	weak.
The	firm	preponderates	and	 is	central.	Gentle	and	 joyous	 in	action:	 then	 it	 furthers	one	to	have

somewhere	to	go,	then	one	has	success.
Great	indeed	is	the	time	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.

The	name	is	explained	on	the	basis	of	the	structure.	The	great,	that	is,	the	yang	element,	outnumbers
with	its	four	lines	the	two	lines	of	the	yin	element.	This	by	itself	would	not	mean	preponderance,	but	the
great	 is	within,	although	 it	belongs	without.	Similarly,	 the	small	preponderates	 (cf.	hexagram	62)	when
weak	 lines	 are	 in	 the	 majority	 and	 without,	 for	 by	 their	 nature	 they	 belong	 within.	 As	 representing
preponderance	of	the	great,	the	hexagram	suggests	the	image	of	a	ridgepole,	the	top	beam	of	a	house,	on
which	 the	whole	 roof	 rests.	 Since	 beginning	 and	 end	 are	weak,	 there	 arises	 the	 danger	 of	 a	 too	 great
inner	weight	and	of	consequent	sagging	to	the	breaking	point.

Despite	 this	 extraordinary	 situation,	 action	 is	 important.	 If	 the	 weight	 were	 to	 remain	 where	 it	 is,
misfortune	would	arise.	By	means	of	movement,	however,	one	gets	out	of	the	abnormal	condition,	chiefly
because	 the	ruler	 in	 the	 lower	 trigram	 is	central	and	strong.	The	attributes	of	 the	 trigrams,	 joyousness
and	gentleness,	also	indicate	the	right	behavior	for	successful	action.

THE	IMAGE
The	lake	rises	above	the	trees:
The	image	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man,	when	he	stands	alone,
Is	unconcerned,
And	if	he	has	to	renounce	the	world,
He	is	undaunted.

The	ideas	of	standing	alone	and	of	renunciation	of	the	world	are	derived	from	the	situation	indicated	by
the	hexagram	as	a	whole.	Standing	alone	unconcerned	is	suggested	by	the	symbol	of	Sun,	the	tree,	and
undauntedness	by	the	attribute	of	Tui,	joyousness.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	



a)	To	spread	white	rushes	underneath.
No	blame.
b)	“To	spread	white	rushes	underneath”:	the	yielding	is	underneath.

The	yielding	line	under	the	strong	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	indicates	that
the	load	is	set	down	with	caution.	Confucius	says	about	this	line:

“It	 does	 well	 enough	 simply	 to	 place	 something	 on	 the	 floor.	 But	 if	 one	 puts	 white	 rushes
underneath,	how	could	that	be	a	mistake?	This	 is	 the	extreme	of	caution.	Rushes	 in	 themselves	are
worthless,	but	they	can	have	a	very	important	effect.	If	one	is	as	cautious	as	this	in	all	that	one	does,
one	remains	free	of	mistakes.”

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	A	dry	poplar	sprouts	at	the	root.
An	older	man	takes	a	young	wife.
Everything	furthers.
b)	“An	older	man	takes	a	young	wife.”	The	extraordinary	thing	is	their	coming	together.

The	trigram	for	wood	stands	under	the	trigram	for	water,	hence	the	image	of	the	poplar,	which	grows
near	water.	This	line,	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	has	the	relationship	of	holding	together	with	the	six	at
the	beginning.	On	 the	one	hand,	 this	produces	 the	 image	of	a	root	sprouting	afresh	 from	below	and	so
renewing	the	 life	process;	on	the	other	hand,	 it	represents	an	older	man	(the	nine	 in	the	second	place)
who	takes	a	young	girl	to	wife	(the	six	at	the	beginning).	Although	this	is	something	out	of	the	ordinary,
everything	is	favorable.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	ridgepole	sags	to	the	breaking	point.
Misfortune.
b)	The	misfortune	of	the	sagging	and	breaking	of	the	ridgepole	is	due	to	its	finding	no	support.

The	third	and	the	fourth	line,	occupying	the	middle	of	the	hexagram,	represent	the	ridgepole.	The	nine
in	the	third	place	 is	a	 firm	 line	 in	a	 firm	place,	which	gives	 too	much	firmness	 for	an	exceptional	 time,
hence	the	misfortune	of	bending	and	breaking	threatens.	For	through	obstinacy	one	cuts	oneself	off	from
the	possibility	of	support.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	ridgepole	is	braced.	Good	fortune.
If	there	are	ulterior	motives,	it	is	humiliating.
b)	The	good	 fortune	of	 the	braced	 ridgepole	 lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 it	does	not	 sag	downward	and

break.
This	line	is	in	better	state	than	the	preceding	one.	It	does	not	sag	down	and	break.	While	the	nine	in

the	third	place	is	too	strong	and	restless,	the	firmness	of	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	modified	by	the
yieldingness	of	its	position.	While	the	nine	in	the	third	place	is	exposed	to	the	danger	of	breaking	because
it	 is	 the	 top	 line	of	 the	 trigram	Sun,	which	 is	open	underneath	and	hence	weak,	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fourth
place	 rests	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 trigram	 Tui,	 which	 is	 open	 at	 the	 top;	 hence	 its	 security.	 “Ulterior
motives”	is	implied	by	the	fact	that	this	line	is	related	by	correspondence	to	the	six	at	the	beginning,	but
here	no	conclusions	may	be	drawn	from	that	fact,	because	the	chief	thing	to	be	considered	about	this	line
is	its	position,	as	minister,	in	relation	to	the	ruler	in	the	fifth	place.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	A	withered	poplar	puts	forth	flowers.
An	older	woman	takes	a	husband.
No	blame.	No	praise.
b)	“A	withered	poplar	puts	forth	flowers.”	How	could	this	last	long?
“An	older	woman	takes	a	husband.”	It	is	nevertheless	a	disgrace.

This	line	stands	in	contrast	to	the	nine	in	the	second	place.	In	the	latter	an	older	man	marries	a	young
girl,	here	an	older	woman	takes	a	husband.	There	the	poplar	puts	forth	sprouts	at	the	root;	here	it	puts
forth	flowers.	There	the	relation	of	correspondence	is	with	the	line	below,	hence	a	sprouting	root;	here	it
is	 with	 the	 line	 above,	 hence	 the	 flowers.	 There	 the	 strong	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 is	 the	 man	 who
marries	a	young	girl	(the	six	at	the	beginning);	here	the	six	at	the	top	is	the	old	woman	who	marries	the
nine	in	the	fifth	place.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	One	must	go	through	the	water.
It	goes	over	one’s	head.
Misfortune.	No	blame.
b)	One	should	not	join	blame	to	the	misfortune	of	going	through	the	water.

The	upper	trigram	Tui	is	a	lake,	hence	the	water.	The	nuclear	trigram	is	Ch’ien,	the	head.	The	upper
nuclear	trigram	ends	with	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place;	thus	the	six	at	the	top	shows	water	reaching	above
the	head.	However,	one	ought	not	to	join	blame	to	the	misfortune,	because	it	is	due	to	the	time,	and	the
intention	is	good.	This	oracle,	“Misfortune.	No	blame,”	is	among	the	noblest	thoughts	possible	about	the
overcoming	of	fate.

NOTE.	 As	 in	 the	 hexagrams	 I	 (27),	 Chung	 Fu	 (61),	 and	 Hsiao	 Kuo	 (62),	 the	 relationship	 of



correspondence	 is	 not	 valid	 in	 this	 hexagram;	 instead,	 the	 upper	 and	 lower	 lines,	 reckoned	 from	 the
middle,	stand	in	contrast	to	one	another.	Thus	the	third	and	the	fourth	line	both	symbolize	the	ridgepole.
But	the	third,	a	firm	line	in	a	firm	place,	is	unlucky,	and	the	ridgepole	sags	and	breaks,	while	the	fourth,	a
firm	line	in	a	yielding	place,	is	lucky;	the	ridgepole	is	braced.	The	second	and	the	fifth	line	are	both	old
poplars.	The	second,	a	firm	line	in	a	yielding	place,	is	lucky;	it	“sprouts	at	the	root.”	The	fifth,	a	firm	line
in	a	 firm	place,	 is	unlucky;	 it	begins	 to	blossom	and	consumes	 its	 last	 remnant	of	 strength.	The	 lowest
line,	which	is	yielding	in	a	firm	place,	is	lucky	by	dint	of	great	caution;	the	top	line,	which	is	yielding	in	a
yielding	 place,	 is	 unlucky	 by	 reason	 of	 courage	 and	 stubborn	 tenacity.	 All	 the	 lines	 standing	 in	 places
opposed	 to	 their	 natures	 are	 lucky,	 because	 place	 and	 character	 complement	 each	 other.	 All	 the	 lines
standing	in	places	that	accord	with	their	natures	are	unlucky,	for	this	creates	overweighting.



29.	K’an	/	The	Abysmal	(Water)

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	two	yang	lines	in	the	second	and	the	fifth	place.	The	fifth,	however,
is	ruler	in	a	more	marked	degree;	it	represents	water,	which	flows	on	when	it	has	filled	up	a	given	place.

The	Sequence
Things	 cannot	 be	 permanently	 in	 an	 overweighted	 state.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

THE	ABYSMAL.	The	Abysmal	means	a	pit.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	ABYSMAL	is	directed	downward.

Water	moves	from	above	downward;	 it	comes	from	the	earth,	but	here	it	 is	 in	the	heavens,	hence	its
tendency	to	return	earthward.

This	 hexagram	 is	 one	 of	 the	 eight	 formed	 by	 doubling	 of	 a	 trigram.	 The	 trigram	 K’an	 contains	 the
middle	 line	 of	 the	Creative	 (in	 the	 Inner-World	 Arrangement	 this	 trigram	has	 shifted	 to	 the	 north,	 the
place	 occupied	 by	 the	 Receptive	 in	 the	 Primal	 Arrangement1).	 Therefore	 this	 hexagram	 and	 the	 next
following	one,	Li—which	bears	the	same	relation	to	the	Receptive	that	K’an	bears	to	the	Creative—stand
together	at	the	end	of	part	1,	which	begins	with	THE	CREATIVE	and	THE	RECEPTIVE.

THE	JUDGMENT
The	Abysmal	repeated.
If	you	are	sincere,	you	have	success	in	your	heart,
And	whatever	you	do	succeeds.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
The	Abysmal	 repeated	 is	 twofold	danger.	Water	 flows	on	and	nowhere	piles	up;	 it	goes	 through

dangerous	places,	never	losing	its	dependability.
“You	have	success	in	your	heart,”	for	the	firm	form	the	middle.
“Whatever	you	do	succeeds”:	advancing	brings	about	achievements.
The	 danger	 of	 heaven	 lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 one	 cannot	 climb	 it.	 The	 dangers	 of	 earth	 are	 the

mountains	and	 rivers,	hills	and	heights.	The	kings	and	princes	make	use	of	danger	 to	protect	 their
realms.

The	effects	of	the	time	of	danger	are	truly	great.
This	hexagram	is	explained	in	two	ways.	First,	man	finds	himself	in	danger,	like	water	in	the	depths	of

an	 abyss.	 The	 water	 shows	 him	 how	 to	 behave:	 it	 flows	 on	 without	 piling	 up	 anywhere,	 and	 even	 in
dangerous	 places	 it	 does	 not	 lose	 its	 dependable	 character.	 In	 this	 way	 the	 danger	 is	 overcome.	 The
trigram	 K’an	 further	 means	 the	 heart.	 In	 the	 heart	 the	 divine	 nature	 is	 locked	 within	 the	 natural
inclinations	 and	 tendencies)	 and	 is	 thus	 in	 danger	 of	 being	 engulfed	 by	 desires	 and	 passions.	 Here
likewise	the	way	to	overcome	danger	is	to	hold	firmly	to	one’s	innate	disposition	to	good.	This	is	indicated
by	the	fact	that	the	firm	lines	form	each	the	middle	in	one	of	the	trigrams.	Hence	action	results	in	good.
Second,	danger	serves	as	a	protective	measure—for	heaven,	earth,	and	the	prince.	But	it	is	never	an	end
in	itself.	Therefore	it	is	said:	“The	effects	of	the	time	of	danger	are	great.”

THE	IMAGE
Water	flows	on	uninterruptedly	and	reaches	its	goal:
The	image	of	the	Abysmal	repeated.
Thus	the	superior	man	walks	in	lasting	virtue
And	carries	on	the	business	of	teaching.

Water	 is	constant	 in	 its	flow;	thus	the	superior	man	is	constant	 in	his	virtue,	 like	the	firm	line	in	the
middle	of	the	abyss.	And	just	as	water	flows	on	and	on,	so	he	makes	use	of	practice	and	repetition	in	the
business	of	teaching.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Repetition	of	the	Abysmal.
In	the	abyss	one	falls	into	a	pit.
Misfortune.
b)	“Repetition	of	the	Abysmal.”	One	falls	into	the	abyss	because	one	has	lost	the	way;	this	brings

misfortune.
This	line	stands	at	the	bottom	and	is	divided,	i.e.,	in	the	bottom	of	the	abyss	there	is	still	another	pit.

This	repetition	of	danger	leads	to	habituation	to	danger.	Being	weak,	the	line	does	not	possess	the	inner
strength	to	withstand	such	temptation.	Hence	at	the	very	start	it	falls	away	from	the	right	path.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	The	abyss	is	dangerous.
One	should	strive	to	attain	small	things	only.
b)	“One	should	strive	to	attain	small	things	only.”	For	the	middle	has	not	yet	been	passed.

This	line	is	strong	and	central	and	could	therefore	of	its	own	nature	accomplish	something	great.	But	it
is	still	hemmed	in	by	danger,	hence	there	is	nothing	to	be	done.	And	its	strength	lies	in	the	very	fact	that	it



does	not	seek	the	impossible	but	knows	how	to	adapt	itself	to	circumstances.
Six	in	the	third	place:

	
a)	Forward	and	backward,	abyss	on	abyss.
In	danger	like	this,	pause	at	first	and	wait,
Otherwise	you	will	fall	into	a	pit	in	the	abyss.
Do	not	act	in	this	way.
b)	“Forward	and	backward,	abyss	on	abyss”:	here	any	effort	ends	up	as	impossible.

This	line	is	weak,	and	not	in	its	proper	place.	It	is	in	the	midst	of	danger	and	moreover	stands	in	the
middle	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Chên,	movement;	hence	it	is	not	only	surrounded	by	danger	but	also	full	of
inner	disquiet.	Hence	the	warning	not	to	act,	as	the	nature	of	the	line	suggests.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	A	jug	of	wine,	a	bowl	of	rice	with	it;
Earthen	vessels
Simply	handed	in	through	the	window.
There	is	certainly	no	blame	in	this.
b)	“A	jug	of	wine,	a	bowl	of	rice	with	it.”	It	is	the	boundary	line	between	firm	and	yielding.

The	trigram	K’an	means	wine.	The	nuclear	trigram	Chên	means	ritual	vessels.	The	whole	is	conceived
as	a	simple	sacrifice.	K’an	stands	in	the	north	and	is	often	coupled	with	the	idea	of	sacrifice.	Despite	its
simplicity,	the	sacrifice	is	accepted,	because	the	attitude	is	sincere.	The	fourth	line	is	in	the	relationship	of
holding	together	with	the	upper	ruler	of	the	hexagram	—hence	the	close	relationships	that	can	dispense
with	ceremonious	outer	form.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	abyss	is	not	filled	to	overflowing,
It	is	filled	only	to	the	rim.
No	blame.
b)	“The	abyss	is	not	filled	to	overflowing,”	for	the	central	line	is	not	yet	great.

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	being	moreover	strong	and	in	a	strong	place,	might	easily	feel	himself	to	be
great	 and	 powerful.	 But	 his	 central	 position	 prevents	 this;	 therefore	 it	 is	 enough	 for	 him	 merely	 to
extricate	himself	from	the	danger.	This	is	the	line	referred	to	by	the	sentence	in	the	Commentary	on	the
Decision:	“Water	flows	on	and	nowhere	piles	up.”

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Bound	with	cords	and	ropes,
Shut	in	between	thorn-hedged	prison	walls:
For	three	years	one	does	not	find	the	way.
Misfortune.
b)	The	six	at	the	top	has	lost	the	way.	This	misfortune	continues	for	three	years.

In	contrast	to	the	six	at	the	beginning,	which	is	caught	in	a	pit	within	the	abyss,	this	line	is	at	the	top,
hence	inclosed	by	a	wall	behind	thorn	hedges	(prison	walls	in	China	are	arranged	in	this	way	to	prevent
escape).	Thorns	are	indicated	by	the	trigram	K’an.	The	unfortunate	situation	of	the	line	is	due	to	the	fact
that	it	rests	upon	a	hard	line,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	For	minor	offenses,	where	repentance	was	shown,
pardon	was	 granted	 after	 a	 year,	 for	more	 serious	 ones	 after	 two	 years,	 and	 for	 very	 grave	 ones	 after
three	years,	so	that	here	it	is	question	of	an	extremely	serious	entanglement.

NOTE.	The	whole	hexagram	of	THE	ABYSMAL	is	based	on	the	idea	that	the	light	lines	are	inclosed	by
the	dark	lines,	and	thus	endangered.	This	idea	of	danger	not	only	gives	the	hexagram	its	character,	but
also	dominates	 the	 individual	 lines.	 It	 appears	 that	 the	 two	 strong	 lines	 (the	 second	and	 the	 fifth)	 fare
better	than	the	others	and	have	the	prospect	of	getting	out	of	danger,	while	the	six	at	the	beginning	and
the	six	in	the	third	place	fall	into	abyss	after	abyss,	and	the	six	at	the	top	sees	no	way	out	for	three	years.
Thus	the	danger	threatening	the	dark	lines	is	even	greater.	It	often	happens,	however,	that	the	idea	of	a
given	hexagram	as	a	whole	is	differently	expressed	in	some	of	the	lines.



30.	Li	/	The	Clinging,	Fire

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	two	yin	lines	in	the	second	and	the	fifth	place;	of	these,	the	line	in
the	second	place	is	ruler	in	a	more	marked	degree,	for	fire	is	brightest	when	it	first	flames	up.

The	Sequence
In	a	pit	there	is	certain	to	be	something	clinging	within.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	THE

CLINGING.	The	Clinging	means	resting	on	something.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	CLINGING	is	directed	upward.
Appended	Judgments
Fu	 Hsi	 made	 knotted	 cords	 and	 used	 them	 for	 nets	 and	 baskets	 in	 hunting	 and	 fishing.	 He

probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	THE	CLINGING.
This	hexagram,	divided	within	and	closed	without,	is	an	image	of	the	meshes	of	a	net	in	which	animals

remain	snared.1	It	is	the	opposite	of	the	preceding	hexagram,	not	only	in	structure	but	also	in	its	entire
meaning.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CLINGING.	Perseverance	furthers.
It	brings	success.
Care	of	the	cow	brings	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
Clinging	means	 resting	 on	 something.	 Sun	 and	moon	 cling	 to	 heaven.	 Grain,	 plants,	 and	 trees

cling	to	the	soil.
Doubled	clarity,	clinging	to	what	is	right,	transforms	the	world	and	perfects	it.
The	yielding	clings	to	the	middle	and	to	what	is	right,	hence	it	has	success.	Therefore	it	 is	said:

“Care	of	the	cow	brings	good	fortune.”
Here	the	co-operation	of	the	two	world	principles	is	shown.	The	light	principle	becomes	visible	only	in

that	it	clings	to	bodies.	Sun	and	moon	attain	their	brightness	by	clinging	to	heaven,	from	which	issue	the
forces	of	the	light	principle.	The	plant	world	owes	its	life	to	the	fact	that	it	clings	to	the	soil	(the	Chinese
character	here	is	t’u,	not	ti2),	in	which	the	forces	of	life	express	themselves.	On	the	other	hand,	bodies	are
likewise	needed,	that	the	forces	of	light	and	of	life	may	find	expression	in	them.

It	 is	 the	 same	 in	 the	 life	 of	 man.	 In	 order	 that	 his	 psychic	 nature	 may	 be	 transfigured	 and	 attain
influence	on	earth,	it	must	cling	to	the	forces	of	spiritual	life.

The	yielding	element	in	Li	is	the	central	line	of	the	Receptive,	hence	the	image	of	the	strong	but	docile
cow.

THE	IMAGE
That	which	is	bright	rises	twice:
The	image	of	FIRE.
Thus	the	great	man,	by	perpetuating	this	brightness,
Illumines	the	four	quarters	of	the	world.

Fire	flames	upward,	hence	the	phrase,	“That	which	is	bright	rises.”	Twice	is	implied	by	the	doubling	of
the	trigram.	In	relation	to	the	spiritual	realm,	brightness	means	the	innate	light-imbued	predispositions	of
man,	 which	 through	 their	 consistency	 illumine	 the	 world.	 The	 trigram	 Li	 stands	 in	 the	 south	 and
represents	the	summer	sun,	which	illumines	all	earthly	things.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	The	footprints	run	crisscross.
If	one	is	seriously	intent,	no	blame.
b)	Seriousness	when	footprints	run	crisscross	serves	in	avoiding	blame.

The	first	line	means	the	morning.	The	fire	at	first	burns	fitfully—an	image	of	the	restless	confusion	of
daily	business.	The	line	is	firm,	hence	the	possibility	of	seriousness.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Yellow	light.	Supreme	good	fortune.
b)	The	supreme	good	fortune	of	yellow	light	lies	in	the	fact	that	one	has	found	the	middle	way.

This	 line	 is	 the	middle	 one	 of	 the	 lower	 trigram,	 hence	 “the	middle	way.”	 Yellow	 is	 the	 color	 of	 the
middle,	here	specially	mentioned	because	the	line	originates	as	the	middle	line	of	the	trigram	K’un,	the
Receptive.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	In	the	light	of	the	setting	sun,
Men	either	beat	the	pot	and	sing
Or	loudly	bewail	the	approach	of	old	age.
Misfortune.



b)	How	can	one	wish	to	hold	for	long	the	light	of	the	setting	sun?
The	third	line	ends	the	lower	trigram,	hence	the	image	of	the	setting	sun.	The	line	is	simultaneously	in

the	nuclear	 trigram	Tui,	which	 indicates	autumn,	and	 in	 the	nuclear	 trigram	Sun,	meaning	growth.	But
Tui	also	means	joyousness	and	Sun	also	means	sighing.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Its	coming	is	sudden;
It	flames	up,	dies	down,	is	thrown	away.
b)	“Its	coming	is	sudden.”	Yet	in	itself	it	has	nothing	that	would	cause	it	to	be	accepted.

The	fourth	line	is	restless	at	the	point	of	intersection	of	the	two	nuclear	trigrams.	It	is	oppressed	from
below	and	rejected	from	above.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Tears	in	floods,	sighing	and	lamenting.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	clings	to	king	and	prince.

The	fifth	place	is	that	of	the	ruler.	Since	the	line	is	yielding,	it	is	not	arrogant	but	humble	and	sad	(it	is
at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	mouth,	hence	the	lament).	Therein	lies	its	good	fortune.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	king	uses	him	to	march	forth	and	chastise.
Then	it	is	best	to	kill	the	leaders
And	take	captive	the	followers.	No	blame.
b)	“The	king	uses	him	to	march	forth	and	chastise”:	in	order	to	bring	the	country	under	discipline.

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place,	is	the	king.	He	uses	the	top	line	to	lead	the	armed
forces	(the	trigram	Li	has	weapons	for	its	symbol).	Since	it	is	at	the	top	and	strong,	the	line	is	correct,	and
therefore	does	not	push	the	business	of	war	too	far.	It	shows	the	light	at	its	height.



PART	II



31.	Hsien	/	Influence	(Wooing)

The	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	in	the	place	of	the	heart.	The	heart	holds	mastery	in	influence,	hence	the
fourth	 line	 is	 here	 a	 ruler	 of	 the	hexagram.	The	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 is	 in	 the	place	 of	 the	back	 and
therefore	means	keeping	still	in	the	midst	of	the	influence.	In	the	midst	of	movement,	it	is	able	to	remain
quiet	and	is	therefore	ruler	of	the	hexagram	to	a	still	greater	degree.

The	Sequence
After	there	are	heaven	and	earth,	there	are	the	individual	things.
After	individual	things	have	come	into	being,	there	are	the	two	sexes.
After	there	are	male	and	female,	there	is	the	relationship	between	husband	and	wife.
After	the	relationship	between	husband	and	wife	exists,	there	is	the	relationship	between	father

and	son.
After	the	relationship	between	father	and	son	exists,	there	is	the	relationship	between	prince	and

servitor.
After	the	relationship	between	prince	and	servitor	exists,	there	is	the	difference	between	superior

and	inferior.
After	the	difference	between	superior	and	inferior	exists,	the	rules	of	propriety	and	of	right	can

operate.
Miscellaneous	Notes
INFLUENCE	fulfills	itself	quickly.

THE	JUDGMENT
INFLUENCE.	Success.
Perseverance	furthers.
To	take	a	maiden	to	wife	brings	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
INFLUENCE	 means	 stimulation.	 The	 weak	 is	 above,	 the	 strong	 below.	 The	 forces	 of	 the	 two

stimulate	and	respond	to	each	other,	so	that	they	unite.
Keeping	Still	and	joyousness.1	The	masculine	subordinates	itself	to	the	feminine.	Hence	it	is	said:
“Success.	Perseverance	furthers.	To	take	a	maiden	to	wife	brings	good	fortune.”
Heaven	and	earth	stimulate	each	other,	and	all	things	take	shape	and	come	into	being.	The	holy

man	 stimulates	 the	 hearts	 of	 men,	 and	 the	 world	 attains	 peace	 and	 rest.	 If	 we	 contemplate	 the
outgoing	stimulating	influences,	we	can	know	the	nature	of	heaven	and	earth	and	all	beings.
Hsien	differs	from	the	character	kan,	“to	stimulate,”	in	that	the	heart	is	not	a	constituent	part	of	it,	as

it	 is	 of	 the	 latter.	Hence	 it	 represents	 an	 influence	 that	 is	unconscious	and	 involuntary,	 not	 one	 that	 is
conscious	and	willed.	It	is	a	matter	of	objective	relationships	of	a	general	kind,	not	those	of	a	subjective,
individual	character.

The	“weak	above”	is	the	trigram	Tui,	the	youngest	daughter;	its	attribute	is	joyousness,	its	image	is	the
lake.	The	“strong	below”	is	Kên,	the	youngest	son;	its	attribute	is	keeping	still,	its	image	is	the	mountain.

The	 explanation	 of	 the	 Judgment	 is	 based	 on	 the	 organization	 of	 the	 hexagram	 (the	 weak	 element
above,	the	strong	below),	the	attributes,	and	the	symbols	(the	youngest	son,	the	youngest	daughter).

THE	IMAGE
A	lake	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	influence.
Thus	the	superior	man	encourages	people	to	approach	him
By	his	readiness	to	receive	them.2

The	mountain	lake	gives	of	its	moisture	to	the	mountain;	the	mountain	collects	clouds,	which	feed	the
lake.	 Thus	 their	 forces	 have	 a	 reciprocal	 influence.	 The	 relation	 of	 the	 two	 images	 shows	 how	 this
influence	comes	about:	it	is	only	when	a	mountain	is	empty	at	its	summit,	that	is,	deepened	into	a	hollow,
that	a	lake	can	form.	Thus	the	superior	man	receives	people	by	virtue	of	emptiness.	The	superior	man	is
compared	 to	 the	mountain,	 the	 people	 to	 the	 lake.	 The	 relation	 is	 formed	 through	 the	 initiative	 of	 the
mountain,	the	superior	man.

THE	LINES
The	stimulation	here	shows	itself	step	by	step.	The	individual	lines	denote	the	respective	parts	of	the

body:	the	three	lower	lines	are	the	legs,	including	toe,	calf,	and	thigh;	the	three	upper	lines	are	the	trunk,
with	the	heart,	the	back	of	the	neck,	and	the	organs	of	speech.

Six	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	big	toe.
b)	Influence	in	the	big	toe:	the	will	is	directed	outward.

This	line	is	related	to	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	in	the	outer	trigram.	The	image	of	the	toe	is	chosen
because	it	denotes	the	lowest	part	of	the	body.	The	will	is	directed	outward,	though	this	does	not	become
manifest,	because	the	movement	of	the	toe	is	invisible	from	outside.

Six	in	the	second	place:



	
a)	The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	calves	of	the	legs.
Misfortune.
Tarrying	brings	good	fortune.
b)	Even	though	misfortune	threatens,	 tarrying	brings	good	fortune.	One	does	not	come	to	harm

through	devotion.
This	 line	 is	 related	 to	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 If	 it	 does	 not	move	 in	 unison	 with	 the	 six	 at	 the

beginning,	but	tarries	until	stimulated	from	above	by	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	it	does	not	come	to	harm.
The	possibility	of	tarrying	is	open	to	it	because	its	position	is	central.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	thighs.
Holds	to	that	which	follows	it.
To	continue	is	humiliating.
b)	“The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	thighs.”	For	he	cannot	keep	still.
When	the	will	is	directed	to	things	that	one’s	followers	hold	to,	this	is	very	base.

Since	the	two	lower	lines	are	weak	by	nature,	it	is	not	surprising	that	they	let	themselves	be	influenced
by	 others.	But	 this	 strong	 line	 could	 easily	master	 itself	 and	not	 yield	 to	 every	 stimulus	 from	below.	 It
makes	itself	contemptible	by	conforming	to	the	aims	of	the	two	lower	lines,	its	followers.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
If	a	man	is	agitated	in	mind,
And	his	thoughts	go	hither	and	thither,
Only	those	friends
On	whom	he	fixes	his	conscious	thoughts
Will	follow.
b)	“Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.	Remorse	disappears.”	Because	in	this	way	one	does	not	stir

up	anything	injurious.
Thoughts	going	hither	and	thither	in	agitation:	by	this	one	shows	that	one	has	as	yet	no	clear	light.
This	is	a	strong	line	in	a	weak	place,	hence	it	has	a	twofold	possibility.	It	can	remain	firm	and,	resisting

the	temptation	to	use	special	 influence,	quietly	make	itself	felt	as	one	of	the	rulers	of	the	hexagram,	by
virtue	of	its	character;	in	this	case	it	does	not	stimulate	anything	injurious,	since	it	is	in	harmony	with	the
right.	Or	it	can	instead	yield	to	the	influence	of	the	six	at	the	beginning,	to	which	it	is	related.	Thereby	it
limits	 its	 influence;	 everything	 is	 shifted	 to	 the	 conscious	 plane,	 and	 the	 inner	 light	 darkens.	 This
possibility	is	suggested	by	the	fact	that	the	line	is	the	lowest	in	the	trigram	Tui,	hence	deepest	within	the
realm	of	the	shadowy	(Tui	is	a	yin	trigram,	therefore	dark).	Confucius	says	of	this	line:

What	need	has	nature	of	thought	and	care?	In	nature	all	things	return	to	their	common	source	and	are
distributed	along	different	paths;	through	one	action,	the	fruits	of	a	hundred	thoughts	are	realized.	What
need	has	nature	of	thought,	of	care?

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	back	of	the	neck.
b)	“The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	back	of	the	neck.”
The	will	is	directed	to	the	ramifications.

The	back	of	the	neck	is	immobile.	The	influence	is	sound	at	the	root.	And	where	the	root	is	sound	the
ramifications	are	also	sound.	Therefore	the	influence	is	good.	The	line	is	strong	and	central	and	ruler	of
the	hexagram,	hence	it	influences	through	the	perfect	calm	of	inner	equilibrium.	At	the	same	time	the	will
is	not	inert;	by	controlling	the	chief	organic	processes,	it	achieves	order	in	particulars	as	well.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	jaws,	cheeks,	and	tongue.
b)	“The	influence	shows	itself	in	the	jaws,	cheeks,	and	tongue.”	He	opens	his	mouth	and	chatters.

This	is	a	weak	line	that	in	itself	has	little	influence.	The	trigram	Tui	means	the	mouth.	The	top	line	is
divided;	hence	opening	of	the	mouth.



32.	Hêng	/	Duration

Duration	means	that	which	always	is.	What	is	in	the	middle	abides	always.	In	the	hexagram	the	second
and	the	fifth	place	are	middle	positions.	But	the	six	in	the	fifth	place,	although	central,	is	weak,	whereas
the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 is	 central	 and	 strong	 as	 well.	 Hence	 the	 second	 line	 is	 the	 ruler	 of	 the
hexagram.

While	 in	 the	 preceding	 hexagram	 the	 correspondence	 of	 the	 lines	 comes	 into	 account	 as	more	 of	 a
hindrance	than	a	help,	here	the	fact	that	all	the	lines	correspond	is	proof	of	a	firm	inner	organization	of
the	 hexagram	 that	 guarantees	 duration.	 The	 strong	 second	 line	 stands	 in	 the	 relationship	 of
correspondence	to	the	weak	six	in	the	fifth	place.

The	Sequence
The	 way	 of	 husband	 and	 wife	 must	 not	 be	 other	 than	 long-lasting.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the

hexagram	of	DURATION.	Duration	means	long-lasting.
Miscellaneous	Notes
DURATION	means	that	which	lasts	long.
Appended	Judgments
DURATION	brings	about	 firmness	of	character.	DURATION	shows	manifold	experiences	without

satiety.	DURATION	brings	about	unity	of	character.
THE	JUDGMENT
DURATION.	Success.	No	blame.
Perseverance	furthers.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
DURATION	means	that	which	lasts	long.	The	strong	is	above,	the	weak	below;	thunder	and	wind

work	together.
Gentle	and	in	motion.	The	strong	and	the	weak	all	correspond:	this	signifies	duration.
“Success.	No	blame.	Perseverance	furthers”:	this	means	lasting	perseverance	in	one’s	course.	The

course	of	heaven	and	earth	is	enduring	and	long	and	never	ends.
“It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.”	This	means	that	an	end	is	always	followed	by	a	new

beginning.
Sun	 and	 moon	 have	 heaven	 and	 can	 therefore	 shine	 forever.	 The	 four	 seasons	 change	 and

transform,	and	thus	can	forever	bring	to	completion.	The	holy	man	remains	forever	in	his	course,	and
the	world	 reshapes	 itself	 to	 completion.	 If	 we	meditate	 on	what	 gives	 duration	 to	 a	 thing,	we	 can
understand	the	nature	of	heaven	and	earth	and	of	all	beings.
The	organization	of	the	hexagram	shows	the	strong	Chên	above	and	the	weak	Sun	below;	this	 is	the

enduring	condition	in	the	world.	Here	the	eldest	son	and	the	eldest	daughter	are	united	in	marriage,	in
contrast	to	the	situation	in	the	preceding	hexagram,	which	represents	entering	into	marriage.

The	images	show	thunder,	which	is	carried	still	farther	by	the	power	of	wind,	and	wind,	which	is
strengthened	by	the	power	of	thunder.	Their	combined	action	imparts	duration	to	both.	The	attribute
of	the	trigram	Sun	is	gentleness,	that	of	Chên	is	movement.	The	outer	movement,	supported	within	by
devotion,	is	likewise	such	that	it	is	capable	of	duration.
Finally,	the	hexagram	is	given	inner	firmness	by	the	correspondence	between	the	individual	lines.	The

six	in	the	first	place	corresponds	with	the	nine	in	the	fourth;	the	nine	in	the	second	place	with	the	six	in
the	fifth;	the	nine	in	the	third	place	with	the	six	at	the	top.

All	this	serves	to	explain	the	name	of	the	hexagram.
On	the	basis	of	the	Judgment,	the	conditions	necessary	for	duration	are	then	set	forth.	They	consist	in

perseverance	in	the	right	course,	that	is	to	say,	continuity	in	change.	This	is	the	secret	of	the	eternity	of
the	universe.

Perseverance	 in	 a	 course	 leads	 to	 the	 goal,	 the	 end.	 However,	 since	 the	 course	 is	 cyclic,	 a	 new
beginning	 is	 joined	 with	 every	 end.	 Movement	 and	 rest	 beget	 each	 other.	 This	 is	 the	 rhythm	 of	 all
happening.	 The	 operation	 of	 this	 principle	 in	 specific	 instances,	 in	 relation	 to	 the	macrocosm	 and	 the
microcosm,	is	then	pointed	out.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	and	wind:	the	image	of	DURATION.
Thus	the	superior	man	stands	firm
And	does	not	change	his	direction.

Thunder	is	that	which	is	mobile,	wind	is	that	which	is	penetrating—the	most	mobile	of	all	things	that
have	 duration	 under	 the	 law	 of	motion.	Wood	 is	 an	 attribute	 of	 both	Chên	 and	Sun,	 hence	 the	 idea	 of
standing	 firm.	 Sun	 is	 within	 and	 penetrates,	 Chên	 is	 without	 and	 moves;	 hence	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 fixed
direction.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	



a)	Seeking	duration	too	hastily	brings	misfortune	persistently.
Nothing	that	would	further.
b)	The	misfortune	of	seeking	duration	too	hastily	arises	from	wanting	too	much	immediately	at	the

outset.
The	first	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	trigram	Sun,	penetration.	The	line	seeks	to	penetrate	too	hastily	and

too	deeply.	This	impetuosity	interferes	with	the	influence,	otherwise	good,	of	the	strong	line	in	the	fourth
place,	whose	affinity	with	the	first	line	is	thus	prevented	from	having	effect.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Remorse	disappears.
b)	Remorse	disappears	for	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	because	it	is	permanently	central.

A	strong	line	in	a	weak	place	might	in	itself	produce	occasion	for	remorse.	But	since	the	line	is	strong
and	central	 and	 in	 correct	 relation	 to	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	place,	 there	 is	 no	danger	 of	 overstepping	 the
limits	of	moderation,	and	thus	no	occasion	for	remorse.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	He	who	does	not	give	duration	to	his	character
Meets	with	disgrace.
Persistent	humiliation.
b)	“He	who	does	not	give	duration	to	his	character”	meets	with	no	toleration.

The	line	is	at	the	point	of	transition	from	the	lower	to	the	upper	trigram,	hence	excited	and	superficial.
In	the	forward	direction,	it	has	not	yet	entered	into	the	movement	of	the	trigram	Chên;	in	the	backward
direction,	 it	 has	 already	 passed	 beyond	 the	 gentleness	 of	 Sun	 (because	 it	 is	 a	 strong	 line	 in	 a	 strong
place).	Therefore	it	does	not	come	to	rest	anywhere.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	No	game	in	the	field.
b)	When	one	is	forever	absent	from	one’s	place,	how	can	one	find	game?

Chên	 is	 represented	 by	 a	 horse	 ranging	 the	 field,	 likewise	 by	 a	 highroad,	where	 there	 is	 no	 game;
hence	the	image.

The	line	is	at	the	beginning	of	the	trigram	Chên,	i.e.,	not	yet	central.	It	is	a	strong	line	in	a	weak	place,
hence	not	correct.	Thus	it	bestirs	itself	unceasingly	where	it	should	not,	and	therefore	finds	nothing.	The
third	line	has	character	(a	strong	line	in	a	strong	place)	“but	no	duration:	the	present	line	has	duration
but	no	character	(a	strong	line	in	a	weak	place).

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Giving	duration	to	one’s	character	through	perseverance.
This	is	good	fortune	for	a	woman,	misfortune	for	a	man.
b)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune	for	a	woman,	because	she	follows	one	man	all	her	life.	A	man

must	hold	to	his	duty;	if	he	follows	the	woman,	the	results	are	bad.
This	line	is	yielding	but	central	and	in	direct	relation	to	the	strong	nine	in	the	second	place,	which	is

ruler	of	the	hexagram.	Hence	these	relations	are	enduring.	However,	the	law”	that	the	weak	unswervingly
follows	the	strong	reflects	a	virtue	of	woman.	Things	are	different	in	the	case	of	a	man.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Restlessness	as	an	enduring	condition	brings	misfortune.
b)	Restlessness	as	an	enduring	condition	in	a	high	position	is	wholly	without	merit.

Chên	has	movement	for	its	attribute.	Here	a	weak	line	is	at	the	high	point	of	the	trigram	of	movement.
It	cannot	control	itself	and	therefore	falls	prey	to	a	restlessness	that	is	harmful	because	it	is	in	opposition
to	the	meaning	of	the	time.	The	line	is	the	opposite	of	the	six	at	the	beginning;	there	we	have	movement
too	hasty	to	endure,	here	movement	that	endures	but	accomplishes	nothing.



33.	Tun	/	Retreat

The	constituting	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	two	yin	 lines	 in	the	first	and	the	second	place.	They
show	the	dark	principle	pressing	forward,	with	the	light	principle	in	retreat.	The	ruler	of	the	action	is	the
strong,	central	line	in	the	fifth	place,	which	finds	correspondence	in	the	weak,	central	line	in	the	second
place.	This	is	the	line	referred	to	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	firm	is	in	the	appropriate	place
and	finds	correspondence.	This	means	that	one	is	in	accord	with	the	time.”

The	 lower	 trigram	 is	 Kên,	 Keeping	 Still,	 hence	 the	 three	 lower	 lines	 show	 themselves	 hampered	 in
retreating.	The	upper	trigram	is	Ch’ien,	strong	movement,	hence	the	retreat	of	these	three	lines	 is	 free
and	unhampered.

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	abide	forever	in	their	place:	hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	RETREAT.	Retreat

means	withdrawing.
Miscellaneous	Notes
RETREAT	means	withdrawing.

THE	JUDGMENT
RETREAT.	Success.
In	what	is	small,	perseverance	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“RETREAT.	Success”:	this	means	that	success	lies	in	retreating.
The	firm	is	in	the	appropriate	place	and	finds	correspondence.	This	means	that	one	is	in	accord

with	the	time.
“In	 what	 is	 small,	 perseverance	 furthers”:	 this	 means	 that	 it	 is	 pressing	 forward,	 and	 on	 the

increase.
Great	indeed	is	the	meaning	of	the	time	of	RETREAT.

Success	lies	in	being	able	to	retreat	at	the	right	moment	and	in	the	right	manner.	This	success	is	made
possible	by	the	fact	that	the	retreat	is	not	the	forced	flight	of	a	weak	person	but	the	voluntary	withdrawal
of	a	strong	one,	as	is	implicit	in	the	nature	of	the	strong	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,
which	finds	correspondence	in	the	weak	six	in	the	second	place.	Strength	is	shown	in	that	one	does	not
attempt	 to	 force	 anything	 but	 shows	 perseverance	 in	 small	 matters	 alone,	 because	 the	 dark	 element,
represented	by	the	two	yin	lines	below,	is	pressing	forward	and	on	the	increase.

The	meaning	of	 the	time	of	RETREAT	is	great;	 that	 is,	 it	 is	vitally	 important	to	hit	upon	the	moment
when	retreat	is	called	for.

THE	IMAGE
Mountain	under	heaven:	the	image	of	RETREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man	keeps	the	inferior	man	at	a	distance,
Not	angrily	but	with	reserve.

The	 question	 is	 to	 what	 extent	 the	 mountain	 under	 heaven	 suggests	 the	 image	 of	 RETREAT.	 One
interpretation	is	that	the	mountain	under	heaven	is	so	high	and	steep	that	men	cannot	come	near	to	 it.
However,	 the	other	 interpretation—that	heaven	 represents	 the	 superior	man,	 the	mountain	 the	 inferior
man—is	more	in	harmony	with	the	movement	of	the	trigrams.	Heaven	has	a	strong	upward	movement	and
therefore	 automatically	 retreats	 from	 the	 mountain,	 whose	 character	 is	 immobility.	 An	 even	 greater
divergence	occurs	in	the	hexagram	P’i,	STANDSTILL	(12),	in	which	the	movements	are	directly	opposed.

What	 the	 situation	 in	 the	 present	 hexagram	 teaches	 is,	 as	 in	 the	 case	 of	 P’i,	 deduced	 from	 the
attributes	of	the	trigrams	taken	separately.	The	superior	man	keeps	the	inferior	at	a	distance	by	being	as
reserved	and	inaccessible	as	heaven;	thus	he	brings	the	inferior	man	to	a	standstill	(this	is	the	attribute	of
the	lower	trigram,	Kên,	mountain).

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	At	the	tail	in	retreat.	This	is	dangerous.
One	must	not	wish	to	undertake	anything.
b)	If	one	undertakes	nothing	while	exposed	to	the	danger	of	the	retreating	tail,	what	misfortune

could	befall	one?
The	 two	 lower	 lines	 are	 those	 before	 which	 the	 four	 upper	 ones	 retreat,	 therefore	 they	 are	 the

constituting	rulers.	As	in	the	hexagram	Lü,	CONDUCT	(10),	 in	which	the	youngest	daughter	follows	the
trigram	Ch’ien,	so	likewise	here,	where	the	youngest	son	is	under	Ch’ien,	the	tail	is	used	as	the	image	of
the	first	line.	The	interpretation	does	not	take	into	account	the	fact	that	in	the	hexagram	as	a	whole,	this
line	represents	the	inferior	man,	because	the	Book	of	Changes	gives	counsel	not	for	inferior	men	but	only
for	 the	 superior.	 Instead,	 the	 counsel	 focuses	 on	 the	 situation	 as	 such,	 which	 is	 retreat,	 particularly
retreat	at	the	tail—the	rear.	To	be	at	the	rear	in	a	retreat	is	dangerous.	The	danger	is	avoided	by	keeping
still.



Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	He	holds	him	fast	with	yellow	oxhide.
No	one	can	tear	him	loose.
b)	“He	holds	him	fast	with	yellow	oxhide”:	this	means	a	firm	will.

Here	 also	 the	 retreat	 is	 hampered.	 This	 line	 occupies	 the	middle	 of	 the	 trigram	Kên,	 Keeping	 Still.
Yellow	is	the	color	of	the	middle.	The	line	is	near	the	nine	in	the	third	place,	hence	holds	it	fast.	Here	we
have	the	perseverance	of	the	inferior,	the	small,	referred	to	in	the	Judgment.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	A	halted	retreat
Is	nerve-wracking	and	dangerous.
To	retain	people	as	men-	and	maidservants
Brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	danger	of	a	halted	retreat	is	nerve-wracking;	this	brings	fatigue.
“To	retain	people	as	men-	and	maidservants	brings	good	fortune.”	True	enough,	but	one	cannot

use	them	in	great	things.
The	 line	 is	 strong	 in	 itself,	and	 it	might	 therefore	be	expected	 to	have	 the	strength	 to	 retreat.	What

makes	this	impossible	is	the	fact,	first,	that	it	is	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	and,	second,
that	the	two	weak	lines	below	cling	to	it.	This	is	tiring.	It	can	of	course	use	the	lower	lines	as	men-	and
maidservants,	because	 in	 the	 trigram	Kên	 the	 top	 line	has	 the	mastery.	This	provides	a	way	out,	 to	 the
extent	that	the	immediate	danger	is	thereby	avoided.	However,	with	such	a	following	it	is	not	possible	to
attain	great	ends.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Voluntary	retreat	brings	good	fortune	to	the	superior	man
And	downfall	to	the	inferior	man.
b)	The	superior	man	retreats	voluntarily;	this	brings	downfall	for	the	inferior	man.

Here	the	entrance	into	the	upper	trigram	is	completed.	Since	heaven	is	strong,	all	three	of	the	upper
lines	can	retreat	unhindered.	This	is	the	line	of	demarcation.	The	superior	man	retreats	upward	and	the
inferior	 man	 remains	 alone	 below.	 This	 is	 bad	 for	 him—though	 not	 for	 the	 superior	 man—because	 he
cannot	rule	himself.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Friendly	retreat.	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	 “Friendly	 retreat.	 Perseverance	 brings	 good	 fortune,”	 because	 the	 will	 thereby	 reaches	 a

correct	decision.
The	will	here	is	related	to	the	will	of	the	six	in	the	second	place,	because	the	two	lines	correspond.	The

one	shows	a	strong	will	to	hold	on	firmly	(a	good	thing	for	inferior	men),	the	other	an	unwavering	will	to
remain	persevering	and	not	to	submit	to	being	held.

Another	explanation,	from	the	Chou	I	Hêng	Chieh,1	deserves	mention,	namely,	that	it	is	a	question	only
of	an	inner	retreat	here,	while	outwardly	one	remains	at	one’s	post	in	order	to	prepare	a	countermove.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Cheerful	retreat.	Everything	serves	to	further.
b)	“Cheerful	retreat.	Everything	serves	to	 further,”	because	there	 is	no	 longer	any	possibility	of

doubt.
Here	one	knows	exactly	what	to	do.	Under	such	circumstances	the	carrying	out	of	the	decision	is	not

difficult.



34.	Ta	Chuang	/	The	Power	of	the	Great

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	yang	line	in	the	fourth	place,	because	the	four	yang	lines	are	the	basis
of	the	power	of	the	hexagram,	with	the	fourth	at	their	head.

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	retreat	forever,	hence	there	follows	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.
Miscellaneous	Notes
The	meaning	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT	shows	itself	in	the	fact	that	one	pauses.
Appended	Judgments
In	the	most	ancient	times	people	dwelt	in	caves	and	lived	in	forests.	The	holy	men	of	a	later	time

made	the	change	to	buildings.	At	the	top	was	a	ridgepole,	and	sloping	down	from	it	there	was	a	roof,
to	keep	off	wind	and	rain.	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.
The	 four	 strong	 lines	 taken	 together	 are	 regarded	 as	 a	 ridgepole,	 as	 also	 in	 the	 hexagram	 Ta	 Kuo,

PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	(28).	The	two	divided	lines	at	the	top	represent	rain	and	wind.
The	hexagram	can	be	thought	of	as	formed	by	the	lines	of	Tui	taken	twice	each.	Tui	has	the	sheep	(or

goat)	for	its	animal,	hence	the	goat	is	used	as	an	image	in	several	of	the	lines.	The	two	upper	lines	are	the
horns.
It	is	the	contrast	between	power	and	violent	force	that	is	expressed	in	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram.	In

structure	it	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.
THE	JUDGMENT
THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.	Perseverance	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT	means	that	the	great	are	powerful.	Strong	in	movement—this	is	the

basis	of	power.
“THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.	Perseverance	furthers,”	for	what	is	great	must	be	right.
Great	and	right:	thus	we	can	behold	the	relations	of	heaven	and	earth.

The	 hexagram	 linked	 with	 the	 first	 month	 is	 T’ai,	 PEACE	 (11).	 Although	 in	 it	 the	 light	 lines	 are
advancing,	they	are	not	yet	in	the	majority.

The	 hexagram	 correlated	with	 the	 third	month	 is	Kuai,	 BREAK-THROUGH	 (43).	 In	 this	 instance	 the
light	lines	are	markedly	in	the	majority,	but	downfall	is	already	imminent.
Neither	of	these	situations	can	be	said	to	denote	power.
But	 the	presence	of	 four	 yang	 lines	 [in	Ta	Chuang]	 indicates	power.	Strength	 is	 the	 attribute	of	 the

inner	trigram,	the	Creative,	and	movement	that	of	the	outer,	the	Arousing.	Strength	makes	it	possible	to
master	the	egotism	of	the	sensual	drives;	movement	makes	it	possible	to	execute	the	firm	decision	of	the
will.	 In	 this	 way	 all	 things	 can	 be	 attained.	 This	 is	 the	 foundation	 upon	which	 power	 rests.	When	 the
statement	 is	made	that	what	 is	great	must	be	right,	 it	means	not	that	great	and	right	are	two	different
things,	but	that	without	rightness	there	is	no	greatness.	The	relations	of	heaven	and	earth	are	never	other
than	great	and	right.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	in	heaven	above:
The	image	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT.
Thus	the	superior	man	does	not	tread	upon	paths
That	do	not	accord	with	established	order.

The	upper	 trigram	 is	Chên,	 thunder;	 the	 lower	 is	Ch’ien,	heaven.	Thunder	 in	 the	heavens	shows	 the
power	 of	 something	 great	 in	 full	 expansion.	 The	 trigram	Chên	 also	 has	 as	 its	 image	 the	 foot,	 and	 the
attribute	of	Ch’ien	is	“great	and	right.”	Thus	the	foot	treads	upon	the	great	and	right	and	takes	its	way
thereon.	 The	 strength	 of	 the	 trigram	 Ch’ien	 imparts	 to	 the	 movement	 of	 the	 trigram	 Chên	 the	 force
resolutely	to	do	what	is	good,	and	this	is	the	basis	of	great	power.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Power	in	the	toes.
Continuing	brings	misfortune.
This	is	certainly	true.
b)	“Power	in	the	toes.”	This	certainly	leads	to	failure.



The	first	line,	as	is	often	the	case	(cf.	hexagram	31),	means	the	toes,	while	the	upper	 lines	mean	the
horns.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	nine	in	the	second	place	finds	good	fortune	through	perseverance	because	it	is	in	a	central

place.
A	nine,	being	a	strong	line,	is	not	ordinarily	correct	in	the	second	place,	which	is	weak,	and	it	might

therefore	be	expected	that	perseverance	would	not	be	recommended	here.	But	 the	place	 is	central	and
moreover	in	the	center	of	the	trigram	Ch’ien,	heaven,	hence	inherently	strong.	Further,	the	line	has	a	firm
relationship	 of	 correspondence	with	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 All	 this	 indicates	 that	 in	 the	 place	 here
occupied	by	the	line,	perseverance	acts	favorably.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	inferior	man	works	through	power.
The	superior	man	does	not	act	thus.
To	continue	is	dangerous.
A	goat	butts	against	a	hedge
And	gets	its	horns	entangled.
b)	The	inferior	man	uses	his	power.	This	the	superior	man	does	not	do.

These	words	explain	the	first	sentence	of	the	oracle.	The	image	for	this	line	is	a	goat	butting	against	a
hedge	and	entangling	 its	horns.	This	 is	due	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 line	 is	 the	 lowest	 in	 the	upper	nuclear
trigram	Tui,	whose	animal	is	the	sheep	or	goat.	Since	a	strong	line	is	in	front	of	it,	this	suggests	the	idea
that	the	goat	butts	against	a	hedge	and	is	caught	fast	by	the	horns.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
The	hedge	opens;	there	is	no	entanglement.
Power	depends	upon	the	axle	of	a	big	cart.
b)	“The	hedge	opens;	there	is	no	entanglement.”	It	can	go	upward.

This	 line,	 as	 the	 uppermost	 of	 the	 four	 advancing	 light	 lines,	 is	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram.	 It	 finds
before	itself	a	divided	line	that	does	not	hinder	further	advance.	Hence	it	can	advance	upward	unchecked.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Loses	the	goat	with	ease.
No	remorse.
b)	“Loses	the	goat	with	ease,”	because	the	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.

The	place	is	strong,	it	is	in	fact	the	place	of	the	prince,	but	the	nature	of	the	line	is	yielding,	hence	the
outer	place	does	not	correspond	with	the	inner	nature.	Therefore	the	line	easily	rids	itself	of	its	obstinate
disposition.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	A	goat	butts	against	a	hedge.
It	cannot	go	backward,	it	cannot	go	forward.
Nothing	serves	to	further.
If	one	notes	the	difficulty,	this	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“It	cannot	go	backward,	it	cannot	go	forward.”	This	does	not	bring	luck.
“If	one	notes	the	difficulty,	this	brings	good	fortune.”
The	mistake	is	not	lasting.

This	 line	 is	 at	 the	height	of	 the	movement	 (Chên),	 topping	 the	 figure	of	 the	goat,	 the	 symbol	of	 the
nuclear	trigram	Tui,	this	suggests	the	idea	of	butting	with	horns.	But	since	it	has	reached	the	end	it	can
go	 no	 farther;	 hence	 confusion	 and	 difficulties.	 However,	 the	 line	 is	 yielding	 in	 character;	 therefore,
instead	of	stiffening	in	its	obstinacy,	it	yields,	and	in	this	way	the	mistake	does	not	become	a	lasting	one.



35.	Chin	/	Progress

This	hexagram	is	characterized	by	light	rising	out	of	the	earth.	The	six	in	the	fifth	place	is	the	ruler	of
the	trigram	Li	(light),	because	it	is	in	the	middle	place	of	heaven.	Hence	it	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,
referred	to	in	the	sentence	of	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	weak	progresses	and	goes	upward.”

The	Sequence
Beings	cannot	stay	forever	in	a	state	of	power;	hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	PROGRESS.

Progress	means	expansion.
Miscellaneous	Notes
PROGRESS	means	the	day.

The	 hexagrams	 Chin,	 Shêng,	 PUSHING	 UPWARD	 (46),	 and	 Chien,	 DEVELOPMENT	 (53),	 all	 mean
progress.	Chin	has	for	its	image	the	sun	mounting	over	the	earth.	It	is	the	finest	of	these	three	hexagrams.
Shêng	is	symbolized	by	wood	rising	above	the	earth.	Chien	shows	the	still	more	gradual	development	of	a
tree	on	a	mountain.	It	is	true	that	a	too	rapid	expansion	has	its	dangers,	as	the	next	hexagram	shows.
In	terms	of	human	society,	the	present	hexagram	indicates	a	wise	ruler	with	obedient	servitors	at	his

side.
THE	JUDGMENT
PROGRESS.	The	powerful	prince
Is	honored	with	horses	in	large	numbers.
In	a	single	day	he	is	granted	audience	three	times.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
PROGRESS	means	making	advance.	Clarity	rises	high	over	the	earth.	Devoted,	and	clinging	to	this

great	clarity,	the	weak	progresses	and	goes	upward.	Hence	it	is	said:	“The	powerful	prince	is	honored
with	horses	in	large	numbers.	In	a	single	day	he	is	granted	audience	three	times.”
The	 structure	 of	 the	 hexagram	 points	 to	 progress—indeed,	 to	 progress	 on	 all	 sides,	 to	 expansion.

Devoted	refers	to	the	lower	trigram	K’un,	here	meaning	servitor.	The	great	clarity	is	the	upper	trigram	Li,
here	meaning	the	ruler.	The	weak	element	that	progresses	is	the	middle	line	of	K’un,	which	occupies	the
middle	place	in	the	upper	trigram,	originally	Ch’ien,	the	father;	hence	it	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the
wise	prince.
The	 ruler	needs	 the	 loyalty	of	his	 servitors,	 and	being	possessed	of	great	wisdom,	he	knows	how	 to

reward	them	fittingly.	This	explains	the	words	of	the	Judgment.
THE	IMAGE
The	sun	rises	over	the	earth:
The	image	of	PROGRESS.
Thus	the	superior	man	himself
Brightens	his	bright	virtue.

The	 Image	 is	 directly	 explained	 through	 the	 relative	 positions	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams:	 Li,	 light,	 stands
above	K’un,	the	earth.	Here	we	have	a	model	for	a	philosophy	of	life:	what	is	innately	light	rises	over	that
which	darkens.	It	can	do	this	of	its	own	power	because	it	is	not	obstructed	by	the	earth,	which	is	devoted
and	compliant	in	its	nature.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Progressing,	but	turned	back.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
If	one	meets	with	no	confidence,	one	should	remain	calm.
No	mistake.
b)	“Progressing,	but	turned	back.”	Solitary,	he	walks	in	the	right.	Composure	is	not	a	mistake.	One

has	not	yet	received	the	command.
A	standstill	is	imposed	upon	the	lowest	line,	weak	in	itself,	by	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên	forming	above	it.

Hence	it	is	stopped	in	its	tendency	to	progress.	Nevertheless	it	goes	its	solitary	way	on	the	path	of	duty
and	calmly	awaits	the	time	that	will	surely	come.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Progressing,	but	in	sorrow.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Then	one	obtains	great	happiness	from	one’s	ancestress.
b)	“One	obtains	great	happiness,”	because	of	the	central	and	correct	position.

This	 line	 is	 similar	 in	 character	 to	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 The	 latter
appears	 under	 the	 image	 of	 the	 ancestress,	 because	 according	 to	 ancient	 custom	 the	 grandson	 was
associated	with	the	grandfather,	not	with	the	father.	Both	lines	being	weak,	the	images	here	are	feminine
—the	grandson’s	wife	and	the	ancestress.	The	line	is	at	the	base	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	Keeping	Still,
hence	likewise	hindered	in	its	advance.

Six	in	the	third	place:



	
a)	All	are	in	accord.	Remorse	disappears.
b)	“All	are	in	accord,”	because	there	is	a	will	to	go	upward.

This	line	is	quite	close	to	the	upper	trigram	Li,	clarity,	hence	misunderstandings	are	cleared	up.	Since
it	is	at	the	head	of	others	of	the	same	mind,	progress	is	possible	for	it.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Progress	like	a	hamster.
Perseverance	brings	danger.
b)	A	hamster	gets	into	danger	through	perseverance;	the	place	is	not	appropriate.

This	line	is	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	Kên,	with	which	the	rat	and	other	rodents	are	associated.	Rats	and
hamsters	hide	themselves	by	day	and	are	active	only	by	night.	But	the	line	is	already	in	the	trigram	of	the
sun,	whose	light	it	cannot	endure.	Since	it	is	a	time	of	progress,	the	line	mingles	with	the	crowd	and	joins
in	what	is	going	on.	However,	this	is	not	its	proper	place	(a	strong	line	in	a	weak	place);	therefore	going
on	in	this	way	brings	danger	(the	line	is	also	the	middle	line	of	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	danger).

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Remorse	disappears.
Take	not	gain	and	loss	to	heart.
Undertakings	bring	good	fortune.
Everything	serves	to	further.
b)	“Take	not	gain	and	loss	to	heart.”	Undertaking	brings	blessing.

A	yin	line	in	a	yang	place	should	really	cause	remorse,	but	since	it	 is	here	in	the	center	of	the	great
light,1	there	is	no	need	for	remorse.	Furthermore,	the	line	is	empty,	that	is,	divided	in	the	middle.	This	is
an	indication	that	it	does	not	take	gain	and	loss	to	heart,	because	it	is	not	dependent	on	external	things.
Fire	has	no	definite	form,	it	flames	up	and	goes	out;	hence	the	image	of	gain	and	loss.	Moreover,	although
the	line	is	the	uppermost	one	in	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	the	Abysmal,	which	suggests	sorrow,	it	is	the
ruler	of	the	hexagram,	hence	sorrow	is	not	necessary.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Making	progress	with	the	horns	is	permissible
Only	for	the	purpose	of	punishing	one’s	own	city.
To	be	conscious	of	danger	brings	good	fortune.
No	blame.
Perseverance	brings	humiliation.
b)	“Permissible	only	for	the	purpose	of	punishing	one’s	own	city.”	The	way	is	not	yet	in	the	light.

The	line	at	the	top	is	strong.	This	suggests	the	image	of	horns.	Since	it	is	a	time	of	progress,	there	is
shown	here	at	 the	end	an	attempt	 to	progress	by	means	of	 force.	But	 the	 line	stands	 isolated,	because
under	it	the	Abysmal	(upper	nuclear	trigram)	sinks	into	the	depths,	leaving	it	forsaken.	It	is	thrown	back
upon	itself	and	is	able	to	discipline	only	its	own	city.



36.	Ming	I	/	Darkening	of	the	Light

This	hexagram	has	for	its	characterizing	image	the	sun	sunk	below	the	earth.	The	six	at	the	top	stands
for	 the	 greatest	 accumulation	 of	 earth,	 hence	 it	 is	 the	 line	 that	 damages	 and	 darkens	 the	 light	 of	 the
others.	It	is	the	ruler	determining	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram.	Both	the	six	in	the	second	place	and	the
six	in	the	fifth	place	have	the	attributes	of	central	and	devoted	character,	and	it	is	they	that	are	injured.
They	are	the	rulers	governing	the	hexagram.	Hence	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“King
Wên	experienced	this,	Prince	Chi	experienced	this.”

The	Sequence
Expansion	 will	 certainly	 encounter	 resistance	 and	 injury.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT.	Darkening	means	damage,	injury.
Miscellaneous	Notes
DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT	means	injury.

The	whole	hexagram	has	a	historical	background.	For	at	the	time	when	King	Wên	wrote	the	judgments
on	the	hexagrams,	conditions	in	China	were	just	as	this	hexagram	pictures	them.	In	the	judgments	on	the
lines,	the	Duke	of	Chou	refers	to	Prince	Chi	as	exemplifying	the	situation.	Confucius	carries	this	further	in
the	Commentary	on	the	Decision	by	adding	the	example	of	King	Wên.
Later	on—quite	in	keeping	with	the	meaning—historical	personages	came	to	be	linked	with	each	of	the

lines.	The	evil	ruler	was	Chou	Hsin,1	the	last	king	of	the	Yin	dynasty.	He	is	symbolized	by	the	six	at	the
top.	Under	him	the	most	able	princes	of	 the	realm	were	all	made	to	suffer	severely,	and	their	 fates	are
mirrored	in	the	individual	lines.	The	highminded	Po	I	withdrew	into	hiding	with	his	brother,	Shu	Ch’i.	He
is	represented	by	the	nine	at	the	beginning.	The	six	in	the	second	place	pictures	King	Wên,	who,	as	the
foremost	of	the	feudal	princes,	was	long	held	prisoner	by	the	tyrant,	with	constant	danger	to	his	life.	The
nine	in	the	third	place	represents	his	son,	afterward	King	Wu	of	Chou,	who	overthrew	the	tyrant.	The	six
in	the	fourth	place	depicts	the	situation	of	Prince	Wei	Tzu	who	was	able	to	save	himself	by	timely	flight
abroad.	Finally,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	depicts	the	situation	of	Prince	Chi,	who	could	save	his	life	only	by
dissembling.
This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT.	In	adversity
It	furthers	one	to	be	persevering.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
The	light	has	sunk	into	the	earth:	DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT.	Beautiful	and	clear	within,	gentle

and	devoted	without,	hence	exposed	to	great	adversity—thus	was	King	Wên.
“In	 adversity	 it	 furthers	 one	 to	 be	 persevering”:	 this	means	 veiling	 one’s	 light.	 Surrounded	 by

difficulties	 in	 the	midst	of	his	closest	kin,	nonetheless	keeping	his	will	 fixed	on	 the	right—thus	was
Prince	Chi.
The	 inner	trigram	is	Li,	 light,	whose	attributes	are	beauty	and	clarity;	 the	outer	trigram	is	K’un,	 the

Receptive,	whose	attributes	are	yieldingness	and	devotion.	King	Wên,	in	whom	these	attributes	are	seen
united,	is	depicted	in	one	of	the	rulers	of	the	hexagram,	the	six	in	the	second	place.
Prince	Chi	is	depicted	by	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	He	too	is	in	difficulties;	these	are	represented	by	the

nuclear	 trigram	K’an,	 the	Abysmal,	danger.	King	Wên	 is	as	 it	were	hidden	by	 this	nuclear	 trigram	over
him.	 For	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 the	 difficulties	 lie	within,	 that	 is,	 below.	 It	 is	 not	 overcome	 by	 them
because	it	is	at	the	top	of	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Chên,	movement.	By	movement	it	gets	clear	of	the
difficulties,	and	the	light,	although	jeopardized,	cannot	be	extinguished.

THE	IMAGE
The	light	has	sunk	into	the	earth:
The	image	of	DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT.
Thus	does	the	superior	man	live	with	the	great	mass:
He	veils	his	light,	yet	still	shines.

The	 upper	 trigram	K’un	means	 the	mass.	 Amid	 the	multitude	 are	 the	 two	 dominating	 rulers	 of	 the
hexagram,	as	the	superior	men.	Their	behavior	 is	explained	on	the	basis	of	 the	relative	positions	of	 the
two	trigrams:	Earth	stands	over	light,	and	this	suggests	a	veiling	of	the	light.	But	the	lower	trigram	Li	is
not	injured	in	its	character	by	this	combination.	Its	light	is	only	veiled,	not	extinguished.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Darkening	of	the	light	during	flight.
He	lowers	his	wings.
The	superior	man	does	not	eat	for	three	days



On	his	wanderings.
But	he	has	somewhere	to	go.
The	host	has	occasion	to	gossip	about	him.
b)	It	is	the	obligation	of	the	superior	man	to	refrain	from	eating	during	his	wanderings.

The	animal	symbol	belonging	to	the	trigram	Li	is	the	pheasant,	hence	the	idea	of	flying.	The	line,	being
strong,	 is	about	 to	advance.	But	 the	nuclear	 trigram	over	 it	 is	K’an,	danger;	hence	 it	 is	hindered	 in	 its
flight.	 It	 renounces	 the	 idea	of	sacrificing	 its	principles	 in	order	 to	secure	a	 livelihood;	 it	prefers	going
hungry	to	eating	without	honor.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Darkening	of	the	light	injures	him	in	the	left	thigh.
He	gives	aid	with	the	strength	of	a	horse.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	second	place	comes	from	its	devotion	to	the	rule.

One	might	expect	misfortune	from	the	situation,	yet	the	oracle	is,	“Good	fortune.”	This	is	because	the
line,	being	yielding,	correct,	and	in	the	proper	place,	is	equal	to	the	demands	of	its	position.	The	first	half
of	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision,	which	uses	the	example	of	King	Wên,	has	reference	to	this	line.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Darkening	of	the	light	during	the	hunt	in	the	south.
Their	great	leader	is	captured.
One	must	not	expect	perseverance	too	soon.
b)	The	purpose	of	the	hunt	in	the	south	has	great	success.

The	 aim	 is	 centered	 on	 the	 hunt.	 That	 success	 comes,	 that	 the	 great	 leader	 of	 the	 darkening	 is
captured,	is	not	something	premeditated,	hence	the	success	is	all	the	greater.	King	Wu	had	no	intention	of
acquiring	personal	power	and	seizing	empire	for	himself;	it	fell	to	him	because	of	his	character.	The	line	is
a	strong	one	in	a	strong	place,	hence	it	carries	out	its	intention.	The	upper	nuclear	trigram	Chên	is	linked
with	the	horse,	the	lower,	K’an,	with	the	chariot,	hence	the	idea	of	a	hunt.	Li,	in	which	this	is	the	top	line,
is	the	south.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	penetrates	the	left	side	of	the	belly.
One	gets	at	the	very	heart	of	the	darkening	of	the	light,
And	leaves	gate	and	courtyard.
b)	“He	penetrates	the	left	side	of	the	belly,”	that	is,	he	finds	out	the	inmost	sentiment	of	the	heart.

K’un,	the	upper	primary	trigram,	means	the	belly,	and	Chên,	the	upper	nuclear	trigram,	means	the	left
side—hence	the	left	side	of	the	belly.	The	line	stands	near	the	lord	of	darkness;	thus	it	finds	out	his	inmost
sentiment	and	can	take	itself	out	of	danger	in	good	time.	Staying	on	would	mean	sacrificing	oneself	to	no
purpose.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Darkening	of	the	light	as	with	Prince	Chi.
Perseverance	furthers.
b)	The	perseverance	of	Prince	Chi	shows	that	the	light	cannot	be	extinguished.

The	second	half	of	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision	refers	to	this	 line,	which	is	central	and	yielding.
Prince	Chi	concealed	his	perseverance	but	maintained	it	inwardly.	Similarly,	the	light	of	the	sun	is	veiled
from	time	to	time,	but	it	cannot	be	extinguished.	The	upper	nuclear	trigram	Chên,	in	which	this	is	the	top
line,	 means	 being	 aroused,	 pressing	 forward.	 Thus	 the	 light	 cannot	 be	 permanently	 held	 below	 but
presses	forward	powerfully	when	the	time	has	come.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Not	light	but	darkness.
First	he	climbed	up	to	heaven,
Then	he	plunged	into	the	depths	of	the	earth.
b)	“First	he	climbed	up	to	heaven.”	Thus	he	might	have	been	able	to	illumine	the	lands	of	all	the

four	quarters	of	the	earth.
“Then	he	plunged	into	the	depths	of	the	earth,”	because	he	had	lost	the	rule.

First	he	held	a	position	through	which	he	might	have	been	able	to	enlighten	all	the	people	of	the	realm.
Instead,	however,	he	made	 it	his	business	 to	 injure	men,	and	thus	 transgressed	the	rule	 that	binds	one
who	governs;	as	a	result,	he	prepared	his	own	downfall.
The	 line	 stands	 at	 the	 top,	where	 the	 earth	 veils	 the	 sun	most	 heavily;	 but	 it	 is	 also	 the	 first	 to	 be

unmasked	in	its	sinister	character	when	the	sun	reappears.



37.	Chia	Jên	/	The	Family	[The	Clan]

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	six	in	the	second,	hence	it	is	said	in
the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	correct	place	of	the	woman	is	within;	the	correct	place	of	the	man
is	without.”

The	Sequence
He	 who	 is	 injured	 without,	 of	 a	 certainty	 draws	 back	 into	 his	 family.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the

hexagram	of	THE	FAMILY.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	FAMILY	is	inside.

The	upper	trigram	Sun	means	influence,	the	lower,	Li,	means	clarity;	accordingly	the	hexagram	points
to	the	outgoing	influence	that	emanates	from	inner	clarity.1

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	FAMILY.	The	perseverance	of	the	woman	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	FAMILY.	The	correct	place	of	the	woman	is	within;	the	correct	place	of	the	man	is	without.

That	man	and	woman	have	their	proper	places	is	the	greatest	concept	in	nature.
Among	the	members	of	the	family	there	are	strict	rulers;	these	are	the	parents.	When	the	father	is

in	 truth	 a	 father	 and	 the	 son	 a	 son,	 when	 the	 elder	 brother	 is	 an	 elder	 brother	 and	 the	 younger
brother	a	younger	brother,	the	husband	a	husband	and	the	wife	a	wife,	then	the	house	is	on	the	right
way.

When	the	house	is	set	in	order,	the	world	is	established	in	a	firm	course.
While	the	Judgment	speaks	only	of	the	perseverance	of	woman,	because	of	the	fact	that	the	hexagram

consists	 of	 the	 two	 elder	 daughters,	 Sun	 and	 Li,	 who	 are	 in	 their	 proper	 places—the	 elder	 above,	 the
younger	below—the	commentary	 is	based	on	the	two	rulers	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place
and	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second,	 and	 speaks	 accordingly	 of	 both	 man	 and	 woman,	 whose	 proper	 places	 are
respectively	without	and	within.	These	positions	of	man	and	woman	correspond	with	the	relative	positions
of	heaven	and	earth,	hence	this	is	called	the	greatest	concept	in	nature	(literally,	heaven	and	earth).

The	proper	positions	of	the	individual	lines	have	been	discussed	above.	The	action	of	the	family	on	the
world	corresponds	with	the	action	of	fire,	which	creates	the	wind.

THE	IMAGE
The	image	of	THE	FAMILY.
Thus	the	superior	man	has	substance	in	his	words
And	duration	in	his	way	of	life.

Wind	is	an	effect	of	 fire.	Similarly,	 the	effect	of	order	within	the	family	 is	to	create	an	 influence	that
brings	order	into	the	world.	It	is	achieved	when	the	head	of	the	family	has	substance	in	his	words,	just	as
flame	must	rely	upon	fuel,	and	duration	in	his	way	of	life,	just	as	the	wind	blows	without	cease.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Firm	seclusion	within	the	family.
Remorse	disappears.
b)	“Firm	seclusion	within	the	family”:	the	will	has	not	yet	changed.

The	 line	 is	 at	 the	 beginning,	 in	 the	 lowest	 place;	 hence	 it	 represents	 the	 time	 when	 the	 will	 of	 an
individual	has	not	yet	changed	for	the	worse.	Here	is	the	point	at	which	to	intervene	and	prevent	change.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	She	should	not	follow	her	whims.
She	must	attend	within	to	the	food.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	second	place	depends	upon	devotion	and	gentleness.

Devotion	 and	 gentleness	 are	 mentioned	 three	 times—in	 the	 hexagram	 of	 YOUTHFUL	 FOLLY	 (4)	 as
attributes	necessary	in	serving	a	teacher,	in	the	hexagram	of	DEVELOPMENT	(53)	as	attributes	necessary
in	serving	a	ruler,	and	in	the	present	instance	as	attributes	necessary	in	serving	a	husband.

The	middle	line	in	the	trigram	Li	means	devotion	and	correctness,	which	seek	nothing	for	themselves.
One	of	 the	nuclear	 trigrams,	K’an,	means	wine	and	 food,	and	 the	other,	Li,	means	cooking	and	baking;
hence	the	preparation	of	food	is	said	to	be	the	duty	of	woman.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	When	tempers	flare	up	in	the	family,
Too	great	severity	brings	remorse.
Good	fortune	nonetheless.



When	woman	and	child	dally	and	laugh,
It	leads	in	the	end	to	humiliation.
b)	“When	tempers	flare	up	in	the	family,”	nothing	is	as	yet	lost.
“When	woman	and	child	dally,”	the	discipline	of	the	house	is	lost.

This	line	is	at	the	top	of	the	lower	primary	trigram	Li,	flame,	and	likewise	at	the	beginning	of	the	upper
nuclear	trigram,	which	is	also	Li;	hence	it	implies	too	much	heat.	Although	this	is	a	mistake,	such	behavior
is	 still	 to	 be	 preferred	 in	 the	 case	 of	 a	 strong	 line	 between	 two	 weak	 ones.	 If	 the	 line	 changes	 and
becomes	yielding,	the	discipline	of	the	house	is	lost.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	She	is	the	treasure	of	the	house.
Great	good	fortune.
b)	“She	is	the	treasure	of	the	house.	Great	good	fortune.”
For	she	is	devoted	and	in	her	place.

The	fourth	line	is	the	yielding	lowest	line	in	the	upper	primary	trigram	Sun,	gentleness.	It	is	the	middle
line	of	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Li;	when	the	line	changes,	it	remains	within	the	lower	nuclear	trigram
Sun	thus	formed.	Sun	means	work,	silk,	a	near-by	market—all	things	that	promise	wealth.	As	a	yielding
line	in	its	proper	place,	it	means	great	good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	As	a	king	he	approaches	his	family.
Fear	not.
Good	fortune.
b)	“As	a	king	he	approaches	his	family”:	they	associate	with	one	another	in	love.

The	line	is	correct,	strong,	central;	hence	the	image	of	a	king.	As	a	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	it	influences
the	other	lines.	Being	central,	it	does	not	effect	its	ends	by	means	of	severity.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	His	work	commands	respect.
In	the	end	good	fortune	comes.
b)	 “Commands	 respect”	 and	 “good	 fortune”:	 this	 indicates	 that	 one	 makes	 demands	 first	 of	 all

upon	oneself.
This	line	is	at	the	end	of	the	hexagram.	It	is	strong	and	stable,	hence	does	not	turn	to	others	but	only	to

itself;	from	this	finally	good	fortune	comes.



38.	K’uei	/	Opposition

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	in	the	second.	Therefore	it	is	said
in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The	yielding	progresses	and	goes	upward,	attains	the	middle,	and
finds	correspondence	in	the	firm.”

The	Sequence
When	the	way	of	THE	FAMILY	draws	to	an	end,	misunderstandings	come.	Hence	there	follows	the

hexagram	of	OPPOSITION.	Opposition	means	misunderstandings.
Miscellaneous	Notes
OPPOSITION	means	estrangement.
Appended	Judgments
The	men	of	ancient	times	strung	a	piece	of	wood	for	a	bow	and	hardened	pieces	of	wood	in	the

fire	for	arrows.	The	use	of	bow	and	arrow	is	to	keep	the	world	in	fear.	They	probably	took	this	from
the	hexagram	of	OPPOSITION.
The	upper	primary	trigram	Li	means	weapons;	the	lower,	Tui,	is	associated	with	the	west,	metal,	and

killing;	 hence	 the	 idea	 of	 bow	 and	 arrow	 to	 keep	 the	 world	 in	 fear	 and	 alarm.1	 The	 correspondences
between	 the	 lines	 are	 of	 great	 importance	 in	 this	 hexagram.	 In	 all	 the	 lines	 the	 situation	 is	 that	 of
opposition;	throughout,	however,	the	tendency	is	toward	smoothing	out	misunderstandings.	This	is	why	at
the	first	line	no	search	is	made	for	the	horse,	which	returns	of	its	own	accord,	and	why	at	the	fourth	line
one	meets	a	person	of	like	mind.	At	the	second	place	it	is	said,	“One	meets	his	lord,”	and	correspondingly
at	the	fifth	place,	“The	companion	bites	his	way	through	the	wrappings.”	Again,	the	pronouncement	at	the
third	place,	“Not	a	good	beginning,	but	a	good	end,”	is	related	to	that	at	the	topmost	place:	“As	one	goes,
rain	falls.”	This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
OPPOSITION.	In	small	matters,	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
OPPOSITION:	 fire	moves	 upward,	 the	 lake	moves	 downward.	 Two	 daughters	 live	 together,	 but

their	minds	are	not	directed	to	common	concerns.
Joyousness	 and	 dependence	 upon	 clarity:	 the	 yielding	 progresses	 and	 goes	 upward,	 attains	 the

middle,	and	finds	correspondence	in	the	firm.	This	is	why	there	is	good	fortune	in	small	matters.
Heaven	and	earth	are	opposites,	but	their	action	is	concerted.	Man	and	woman	are	opposites,	but

they	 strive	 for	 union.	 All	 beings	 stand	 in	 opposition	 to	 one	 another:	 what	 they	 do	 takes	 on	 order
thereby.	Great	indeed	is	the	effect	of	the	time	of	OPPOSITION.
The	name	of	the	hexagram	is	derived	from	the	relationships	developing	out	of	the	movement	of	the	two

trigrams.	 Fire	 flames	 upward,	 water	 seeps	 downward:	 when	 they	 are	 quiescent,	 their	 movements	 can
unite;	when	 they	 are	 in	motion,	 they	 draw	 farther	 and	 farther	 apart.	 The	 two	 daughters	 are	 originally
together	in	the	parental	house.	Their	ways	part	as	they	grow	up	and	marry	into	different	families.	Thus
the	 movement	 leads	 more	 and	more	 to	 opposition.	 However,	 since	 this	 movement	 is	 a	 natural	 one,	 it
comes	of	itself	to	a	turning	when	it	has	reached	an	extreme.

The	 trigram	Tui	has	 joyousness	as	an	attribute;	 the	 trigram	Li,	dependence	upon	clarity.	 Joyousness
unites,	clarity	finds	the	right	way	for	this.	Furthermore,	the	relations	of	the	two	rulers	of	the	hexagram
are	favorable,	so	that	there	is	a	possibility	of	success	at	least	in	small	matters.

However,	Confucius	goes	still	further.	He	shows	that	opposition	is	actually	the	natural	prerequisite	for
union.	As	a	result	of	opposition,	a	need	to	bridge	it	arises;	this	is	true	as	regards	heaven	and	earth,	man
and	woman.	Similarly,	it	is	the	individual	differences	between	things	that	enable	us	to	differentiate	them
clearly	 and	hence	 to	 classify	 them.	This	 is	 the	 effect	 of	 the	phase	 of	 opposition—a	phase	 that	must	 be
transcended.

THE	IMAGE
Above,	fire;	below,	the	lake:
The	image	of	OPPOSITION.
Thus	amid	all	fellowship
The	superior	man	retains	his	individuality.

The	 images	belonging	 to	 the	 trigrams,	whose	 tendencies	 combat	each	other,	 create	 the	 condition	of
opposition,	while	their	attributes	lead	to	its	being	overcome.	The	joyousness	of	Tui	symbolizes	fellowship;
the	clarity	of	Li	symbolizes	clearly	recognizable	individuality.

The	 reason	 why	 the	 two	 daughters	 tend	 to	 opposition	 is	 that	 the	 eldest,	 whose	 authority	 would
maintain	order,	is	absent.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Remorse	disappears.
If	you	lose	your	horse,	do	not	run	after	it;
It	will	come	back	of	its	own	accord.
When	you	see	evil	people,



Guard	yourself	against	mistakes.
b)	“When	you	see	evil	people,”	avoid	mistakes.

As	 long	as	an	opposition	has	not	become	poisoned,	 it	can	be	smoothed	out.	A	mistake	arises	only	 in
letting	it	go	too	far.	This	line	is	in	relationship	with	the	fourth,	which	stands	in	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,
meaning	horse,	but	does	not	correspond	with	it;	hence	the	horse	gets	lost.	The	first	line	is	firm	and	can
control	 itself,	and	so	 it	does	not	run	after	the	horse.	The	horse	comes	back	of	 its	own	accord	when	the
opposition	has	run	its	course.	The	fourth	line,	which	belongs	both	to	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	danger,	and
to	Li,	excitement,	symbolizes	the	evil	man.	Through	the	joyousness	of	the	trigram	Tui,	a	sharpening	of	the
opposition,	and	the	mistakes	that	would	ensue,	are	avoided.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	One	meets	his	lord	in	a	narrow	street.
No	blame.
b)	If	one	meets	his	lord	in	a	narrow	street,	one	has	not	lost	his	way.

Attempting	to	attain	something	by	crooked	paths	is	to	lose	one’s	way.	But	this	line	is	firm	and	central,
hence	not	set	on	a	meeting	at	all	costs.	The	meeting,	although	informal—that	 is,	not	quite	according	to
rule—is	accidental,	or	brought	about	by	the	lord,	so	that	there	is	no	reason	for	reproaching	oneself.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	One	sees	the	wagon	dragged	back,
The	oxen	halted,
A	man’s	hair	and	nose	cut	off.
Not	a	good	beginning,	but	a	good	end.
b)	“One	sees	the	wagon	dragged	back”:	this	happens	because	the	place	is	not	the	right	one.
“Not	a	good	beginning,	but	a	good	end”:	this	happens	through	meeting	one	that	is	firm.

The	place	is	not	the	right	one,	because	a	weak	six	is	in	the	strong	third	place.	Moreover,	the	weak	line
is	placed	between	the	strong	lines	in	the	second	and	the	fourth	place;	these	dare	encroach	because	they
also	are	not	in	their	proper	places.	The	nuclear	trigram	K’an	means	a	wagon;	the	nuclear	trigram	Li,	in
the	center	of	which	the	line	stands,	is	associated	with	the	cow.	The	fact	that	a	good	end	is	attained	is	due
to	the	relations	with	the	strong	line	at	the	top,	which	resolves	the	misunderstandings.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Isolated	through	opposition,
One	meets	a	like-minded	man
With	whom	one	can	associate	in	good	faith.
Despite	the	danger,	no	blame.
b)	Association	in	good	faith,	without	blame:	this	means	that	the	will	effects	its	purpose.

The	companion	found	is	the	strong	line	at	the	beginning,	which	is	of	the	same	character	as	the	nine	in
the	 fourth	place.	Both	have	 the	will	 to	overcome	 the	misunderstandings,	and	 thus	succeed.	This	 line	 is
isolated	 because	 of	 outer	 circumstances;	 for	 it	 is	 placed	 between	 two	 dark	 lines	 representing	 inferior
persons.	Here	there	is	no	relationship	of	correspondence	with	the	first	line,	but	rather	that	of	similarity	of
kind.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Remorse	disappears.
The	companion	bites	his	way	through	the	wrappings.
If	one	goes	to	him,
How	could	it	be	a	mistake?
b)	“The	companion	bites	his	way	through	the	wrappings.”	If	one	goes	to	him,	it	brings	blessing.

The	companion	is	the	nine	in	the	second	place.	The	present	line	stands	in	the	upper	primary	trigram	Li,
the	nine	in	the	second	place	stands	in	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	Li;	thus	they	are	of	like	kind.	Change	of
the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 produces	 the	 hexagram	 of	 BITING	 THROUGH	 (21),	 whose	 second	 line
similarly	bites	through	the	skin.	This	describes	the	leader	who	finds	a	capable	assistant	to	help	in	clearing
up	misunderstandings.	The	person	in	the	superior	position	must	go	out	to	meet	the	companion.	The	rule
demands	this.	A	man	of	ability	will	not	take	the	initiative	and	offer	himself.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Isolated	through	opposition,
One	sees	one’s	companion	as	a	pig	covered	with	dirt,
As	a	wagon	full	of	devils.
First	one	draws	a	bow	against	him,
Then	one	lays	the	bow	aside.
He	is	not	a	robber;	he	will	woo	at	the	right	time.
As	one	goes,	rain	falls;	then	good	fortune	comes.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	rainfall	means	that	all	doubts	disappear.

The	nuclear	trigram	is	K’an,	meaning	pig	as	well	as	wagon,	cunning,	danger,	also	robbers.	The	trigram
Li	means	a	bow.	But	since	the	third	line,	to	which	all	this	refers,	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence
to	the	present	line,	this	is	all	illusion.	It	is	not	a	hostile	assault,	but	a	well-meant	approach,	for	the	purpose
of	a	mutual	relation.	As	soon	as	this	is	recognized,	doubts	disappear	and	misunderstandings	are	cleared



up.



39.	Chien	/	Obstruction

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	Therefore	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the
Decision:	 “He	goes	 and	 attains	 the	middle.”	 The	 reference	 to	 “the	 great	man”	 in	 the	 Judgment	 always
relates	to	the	fifth	place.

The	Sequence
Through	 opposition	 difficulties	 necessarily	 arise.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

OBSTRUCTION.	Obstruction	means	difficulty.
Miscellaneous	Notes
OBSTRUCTION	means	difficulty.

The	 idea	 of	 obstruction	 is	 expressed	 by	 danger	without	 (K’an),	 in	 the	 face	 of	 which	 one	 keeps	 still
within	(Kên).	This	distinguishes	the	hexagram	from	YOUTHFUL	FOLLY	(4),	where	K’an	is	within	and	Kên
is	without.	The	obstruction	 is	not	a	 lasting	condition,	hence	everything	 in	 the	hexagram	 is	centered	on
overcoming	 it.	 It	 is	 overcome	 in	 that	 the	 strong	 line	moves	 outward	 to	 the	 fifth	 place	 and	 from	 there
initiates	a	countermovement.	The	obstruction	is	overcome	not	by	pressing	forward	into	danger	nor	by	idly
keeping	still,	but	by	retreating,	yielding.	Hence	the	text	alludes	to	the	words	of	the	hexagram	K’un,	THE
RECEPTIVE	(2).	K’un	is	in	the	southwest,	it	is	the	earth,	that	which	is	level;	friends	are	there.	Kên	is	in	the
northeast,	it	is	the	mountain,	that	which	is	steep;	there	it	is	lonely.	For	overcoming	danger	one	has	need	of
fellowship;	hence	retreat.	The	great	man	is	seen	because	he	stands	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Li,
which	means	light	and	the	eye.	The	movement	indicated	is	expressed	also	in	the	individual	lines.

THE	JUDGMENT
OBSTRUCTION.	The	southwest	furthers.
The	northeast	does	not	further.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
OBSTRUCTION	means	 difficulty.	 The	 danger	 is	 ahead.	 To	 see	 the	 danger	 and	 to	 know	 how	 to

stand	still,	that	is	wisdom.
In	OBSTRUCTION	“the	southwest	furthers,”	because	he	goes	and	attains	the	middle.
“The	northeast	does	not	further,”	because	there	the	way	comes	to	an	end.
“It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man,”	because	he	goes	and	wins	merits.
In	the	right	place,	“perseverance	brings	good	fortune,”	because	through	it	the	country	comes	into

order.
The	effect	of	a	time	of	OBSTRUCTION	is	great	indeed.

Danger,	 the	trigram	K’an,	 is	 in	 front.	To	see	the	danger	 (upper	nuclear	 trigram	Li,	 light,	eye)	and	to
stop	 short	 in	 time	 (inner	 trigram	 Kên,	 Keeping	 Still)	 is	 true	 wisdom,	 in	 contrast	 to	 the	 situation	 in
YOUTHFUL	FOLLY,	where	the	positions	of	danger	and	standstill	are	reversed.	In	order	to	overcome	the
danger	it	is	important	to	take	the	safe-road,	the	road	toward	the	southwest,	where	one	attains	the	middle,
that	 is,	sees	oneself	surrounded	by	helpers.	The	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	place	does	this.	When	the	ruler	of	 the
hexagram	is	in	the	outer	trigram	it	is	said,	“He	goes,”	and	when	it	is	in	the	inner	trigram,	“He	comes.”	In
the	northeast	(north	means	danger,	northeast	means	mountain)	one	comes	to	an	impassable	road,	leading
no	 farther.	 It	 is	 favorable	 to	 see	 the	 great	man—the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 standing	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the
nuclear	 trigram	Li.	Through	going	something	 is	achieved:	 in	 that	 the	 ruler	of	 the	hexagram	“goes,”	he
takes	part	in	the	downward	movement	of	the	trigram	K’an,	water,	which	flows	toward	the	earth	and	thus
accomplishes	something.	Abiding	in	the	right	place	brings	good	fortune,	because	one’s	activity	is	directed
not	outward	but	inward,	to	one’s	own	country.	Turning	inward	is	achieved	through	obstructions,	and	the
improvement	brought	about	by	this	turning	inward	(“conversion”)	is	the	great	value	inhering	in	the	effect
of	a	time	of	obstruction.

THE	IMAGE
Water	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	OBSTRUCTION.
Thus	the	superior	man	turns	his	attention	to	himself
And	molds	his	character.

Water	on	the	top	of	a	mountain	cannot	flow	down	in	accordance	with	its	nature,	because	rocks	hinder
it.	It	must	stand	still.	This	causes	it	to	increase,	and	the	inner	accumulation	finally	becomes	so	great	that
it	overflows	the	barriers.	The	way	of	overcoming	obstacles	 lies	 in	turning	inward	and	raising	one’s	own
being	to	a	higher	level.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Going	leads	to	obstructions,
Coming	meets	with	praise.
b)	“Going	leads	to	obstructions,	coming	meets	with	praise,”	because	it	is	right	to	wait.



Going,	as	this	weak	line	at	the	beginning	would	be	inclined	to	do,	would	lead	into	danger.	Coming	back
is	in	accord	with	the	trigram	Kên,	Keeping	Still.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	The	king’s	servant	is	beset	by	obstruction	upon	obstruction,
But	it	is	not	his	own	fault.
b)	“The	king’s	servant	is	beset	by	obstruction	upon	obstruction.”	But	in	the	end	there	is	no	blame

in	this.
This	 line	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	hexagram,	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fifth

place.	 The	 ruler	 stands	 in	 the	 very	 center	 of	 the	 danger	 (upper	 primary	 trigram	 K’AN).	 His	 servant
hastens	 to	 his	 aid,	 but	 since	 his	 path	 leads	 through	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 K’an,	 he	 meets	 with	 one
obstruction	after	another.	However,	this	situation	is	not	due	to	his	own	position;	the	line	is	in	the	trigram
Kên,	Keeping	 Still,	 hence	 it	 is	 not	 inherently	 necessary	 for	 it	 to	 go	 into	 these	 dangers.	 It	 is	 only	 duty,
arising	from	the	relation	to	the	ruler,	that	leads	it	into	peril.	Therefore	it	remains	free	of	fault	even	in	the
most	dangerous	situation.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Going	leads	to	obstructions;
Hence	he	comes	back.
b)	“Going	leads	to	obstructions;	hence	he	comes	back.”	Those	within	rejoice	over	it.

This	strong	 line	 is	 the	ruler	of	 the	trigram	Kên	and	has	two	weak	 lines	depending	on	 it.	 Its	strength
might	 induce	 it	 to	move	outward,	 but	 there	 it	 encounters	 the	 trigram	of	 danger	 (K’an).	Hence	 it	 turns
back,	and	the	six	in	the	second	place,	which	has	a	relationship	of	holding	together	with	it,	rejoices.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Going	leads	to	obstructions,
Coming	leads	to	union.
b)	 “Going	 leads	 to	 obstructions,	 coming	 leads	 to	 union.”	 In	 the	 appropriate	 place	 one	 finds

support.
The	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	related	to	the	six	at	the	top,	but	should	it	wish	to	go	there,	it	would	find	a

weak	line	at	the	pinnacle	of	danger.	Return	to	its	own	place	leads	to	union.	The	fourth	place	is	that	of	the
minister,	who	serves	the	strong	ruler	above,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	and	who	is	supported	from	below
by	the	strong	assistant,	the	nine	in	the	third	place.	In	the	appropriate	place	(the	dark	fourth	place	is	the
proper	one	for	a	yielding	line),	it	achieves	union	with	these	two	strong	lines.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	In	the	midst	of	the	greatest	obstructions,
Friends	come.
b)	 “In	 the	midst	 of	 the	 greatest	 obstructions,	 friends	 come.”	 For	 they	 are	 ruled	 by	 the	 central

position.
The	 fifth	 line	 is	 the	ruler	of	 the	hexagram.	As	 the	middle	 line	of	 the	upper	 trigram	K’an,	 it	 is	 in	 the

center	of	danger—that	is,	in	the	midst	of	the	greatest	obstructions.	However,	it	is	related	to	the	six	in	the
second	place,	to	the	six	 in	the	fourth	place,	and	also	to	the	six	at	the	top,	and	these	come	as	friends	to
help	it,	because	it	rules	them	by	virtue	of	its	central	position.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Going	leads	to	obstructions,
Coming	leads	to	great	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
b)	 “Going	 leads	 to	obstructions,	 coming	 leads	 to	great	good	 fortune,”	 for	 the	will	 is	directed	 to

inner	things.
“It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.”	For	thus	does	one	follow	a	man	of	rank.

If	the	weak	line	at	the	top	should	try	to	go	forth	and	overcome	the	obstacles	alone,	it	would	meet	with
failure.	 Its	 nature,	 its	will,	 direct	 it	 toward	 the	 great,	 i.e.,	 strong	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place,	which	 has	 a
relationship	of	correspondence	with	it.	It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man	because	the	nine	in	the	fifth
place,	the	great	man	of	the	hexagram,	stands	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Li,	eye,	light.	He	is	seen	in
the	sense	that	the	present	line,	together	with	the	nine	in	the	third	place,	follows	him	as	the	man	of	rank
under	whose	leadership	the	obstructions	are	overcome.



40.	Hsieh	/	Deliverance

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	second	and	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	Therefore	it	is	said
in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision,	“By	going	he	wins	the	multitude,”	this	referring	to	the	fifth	place,	and
further,	“He	wins	the	central	position,”	this	referring	to	the	second	place.

The	Sequence
Things	 cannot	 be	 permanently	 amid	 obstructions.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

DELIVERANCE.	Deliverance	means	release	from	tension.
Miscellaneous	Notes
DELIVERANCE	means	release	from	tension.

The	idea	of	release	and	deliverance	is	expressed	in	the	fact	that	the	trigram	Chên,	movement,	stands
above	 (without)	 and	 moves	 away	 from	 the	 lower	 (inner)	 trigram	 K’an,	 danger.	 In	 one	 aspect,	 this
hexagram	is	a	further	development	of	the	situation	described	in	Chun,	DIFFICULTY	AT	THE	BEGINNING
(3);	 in	 the	 latter,	 there	 is	movement	within	 danger,	 here	movement	 brings	 deliverance	 from	danger.	 In
another	 aspect,	 this	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the	 preceding	 one.	 The	 obstruction	 is	 removed,
deliverance	has	come.

In	 terms	 of	 the	 Image,	 thunder—electricity—has	 penetrated	 the	 rain	 clouds.	 There	 is	 release	 from
tension.	The	thunderstorm	breaks,	and	the	whole	of	nature	breathes	freely	again.

THE	JUDGMENT
DELIVERANCE.	The	southwest	furthers.
If	there	is	no	longer	anything	where	one	has	to	go,
Return	brings	good	fortune.
If	there	is	still	something	where	one	has	to	go,
Hastening	brings	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
DELIVERANCE.	 Danger	 produces	 movement.	 Through	 movement	 one	 escapes	 danger:	 this	 is

deliverance.
During	deliverance	“the	southwest	furthers”:	by	going	he	wins	the	multitude.
“His	return	brings	good	fortune,”	because	he	wins	the	central	position.
“If	 there	 is	 still	 something	where	one	has	 to	go,	hastening	brings	good	 fortune.”	Then	going	 is

meritorious.
When	heaven	and	earth	deliver	themselves,	thunder	and	rain	set	in.	When	thunder	and	rain	set	in,

the	seed	pods	of	all	fruits,	plants,	and	trees	break	open.
The	time	of	DELIVERANCE	is	great	indeed.

Danger	incites	to	movement,	and	this	movement	leads	out	of	the	danger;	this	explanation	of	the	name
of	the	hexagram	is	derived	from	the	attributes	of	the	two	primary	trigrams.	The	southwest	is	the	place	of
the	 trigram	K’un,	 the	Receptive.	 Its	 opposite,	 the	 northeast,	 is	 no	 longer	mentioned,	 because	 here	 the
difficulties	have	already	been	overcome.	K’un	also	means	the	multitude.	This	refers	to	the	six	in	the	fifth
place.	When	deliverance	has	only	just	come,	a	certain	protection	is	needed,	a	quiet	nurturing	under	the
maternal	care	of	the	Receptive.	By	returning	when	there	is	nothing	more	to	be	attended	to,	the	nine	in	the
second	place	attains	the	center	of	the	lower	trigram.	If	there	is	still	something	to	be	done,	it	brings	good
fortune	to	do	it	as	quickly	and	carefully	as	possible,	because	the	movement	is	then	crowned	with	success;
it	is	not	a	purposeless,	futile	effort.	Lastly	there	is	mentioned,	as	an	analogy,	the	release	from	atmospheric
tension	that	comes	with	a	thunderstorm,	which	clears	the	air	and	causes	all	seed	pods	to	burst	open.	Thus
the	time	of	DELIVERANCE	also	has	its	greatness.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	and	rain	set	in:
The	image	of	DELIVERANCE.
Thus	the	superior	man	pardons	mistakes
And	forgives	misdeeds.

K’an	means	lawsuits	and	transgressions.	Chên	moves	upward	and	lets	the	mistakes	sink	down	behind
it.	In	life	this	brings	a	release	from	tension	similar	to	that	produced	in	nature	by	the	clearing	of	the	air
after	a	thunderstorm.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Without	blame.
b)	On	the	border	between	firm	and	yielding	there	should	be	no	blame.

This	line	is	in	a	strong	place,	but	yielding	by	nature.	It	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to
the	nine	in	the	fourth	place,	which	occupies	a	weak	place	but	is	strong	by	nature.	The	joint	action	of	these
balanced	opposites	brings	order	into	the	whole	situation,	and	naturally	everything	goes	well.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	



a)	One	kills	three	foxes	in	the	field
And	receives	a	yellow	arrow.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	perseverance	of	the	nine	in	the	second	place	is	due	to	its	attaining	the

middle	way.
The	trigram	K’AN	denotes	a	fox,	Li	denotes	bow	and	arrow.	The	second	place,	as	the	upper	of	the	two

lowest	 places,	 is	 the	 place	 of	 the	 field	 (cf.	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 in	 hexagram	 1,	 Ch’ien,	 THE
CREATIVE).	The	three	foxes	are	three	of	the	four	yin	lines,	omitting	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	If	a	man	carries	a	burden	on	his	back
And	nonetheless	rides	in	a	carriage,
He	thereby	encourages	robbers	to	draw	near.
Perseverance	leads	to	humiliation.
b)	“If	a	man	carries	a	burden	on	his	back	and	nonetheless	rides	in	a	carriage,”	he	should	really	be

ashamed	of	himself.
When	I	myself	thus	attract	robbers,	on	whom	shall	I	lay	the	blame?

This	 line	 is	 at	 the	 place	where	 the	 lower	 primary	 trigram	K’an	 and	 the	 upper	 nuclear	 trigram	K’an
come	in	contact.	K’an	means	carriage	and	robbers.	The	structure	of	the	hexagram	is	such	that	this	six,	a
yin	 line	 and	 weak	 by	 nature,	 seeks	 to	 occupy	 the	 top	 place	 in	 the	 lower	 trigram.	 Its	 strength	 being
insufficient	 for	this,	 it	carries	a	heavy	burden.	 In	this	untenable	position	 it	necessarily	attracts	robbers.
Persisting	in	this	state	naturally	leads	to	humiliation.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Deliver	yourself	from	your	great	toe.
Then	the	companion	comes,
And	him	you	can	trust.
b)	“Deliver	yourself	from	your	great	toe”:	for	the	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.

The	trigram	Chên	means	foot;	the	six	in	the	third	place	is	under	Chên	and	so	gives	rise	to	the	image	of
the	 big	 toe.	 The	 present	 line	 and	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place	 are	 friends	 of	 kindred	 nature,	 jointly
rendering	 loyal	 help	 to	 the	 ruler	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 But	 to	 do	 this	 it	 is	 necessary	 first	 to	 exclude	 the
interfering	six	in	the	third	place,	to	which	the	present	line	stands	in	the	relationship	of	holding	together.
The	place	is	not	appropriate,	because	this	is	a	yin	place,	while	the	line	is	a	yang	line.1

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	If	only	the	superior	man	can	deliver	himself,
It	brings	good	fortune.
Thus	he	proves	to	inferior	men	that	he	is	in	earnest.
b)	The	superior	man	delivers	himself,	because	inferior	men	then	retreat.

The	 fifth	 place	 is	 that	 of	 the	 ruler.	 In	 times	 of	 deliverance,	 the	 yielding—disposition	 of	 this	 line	 is
appropriate,	 because	 it	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 strong	 assistants.	 But	 it	 is
important	to	liberate	oneself	from	inferior	men	who	are	also	yielding	in	temperament.	When	they	notice
this	 attitude,	 they	 retreat	 of	 their	 own	 accord,	 The	 line	 delivers	 itself,	 as	 does	 the	 preceding	 line,	 by
moving	upward	in	accord	with	the	trigram	Chên.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	prince	shoots	at	a	hawk	on	a	high	wall.
He	kills	it.	Everything	serves	to	further.
b)	“The	prince	shoots	at	a	hawk”:	thereby	he	delivers	himself	from	those	who	resist.

The	dark	line	at	the	top	is	injurious.	With	the	exception	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place,	all	the	yin	lines	in
the	 time	 of	 DELIVERANCE	 tend	 to	 have	 a	 negative	 influence,	 in	 so	 far	 as	 this	 is	 not	 neutralized	 by
relationships	 with	 yang	 lines.	 This	 highly	 placed	 evildoer	 is	 shot	 from	 below,	 where	 the	 trigram	 K’an
(arrow)	 is	 situated,	 because	 the	 movement	 is	 upward,	 and	 thus	 deliverance	 from	 the	 last	 obstacle	 is
achieved.



41.	Sun	/	Decrease

The	hexagram	Sun	is	based	on	the	idea	that	the	top	line	of	the	lower	trigram	is	decreased	in	order	to
increase	the	top	line	of	the	upper	trigram;	hence	it	is	the	six	in	the	third	place	and	the	nine	at	the	top	that
are	 the	 constituting	 rulers	 of	 the	 hexagram.	 But,	 since	 the	 ruler	 is	 the	 one	 who	 is	 enriched	 through
decrease	of	what	is	below	and	increase	of	what	is	above,	the	governing	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in
the	fifth	place.

The	Sequence
Through	 release	 of	 tension	 something	 is	 sure	 to	 be	 lost.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

DECREASE.
Miscellaneous	Notes
The	hexagrams	of	DECREASE	and	INCREASE	are	the	beginning	of	flowering	and	of	decline.

This	hexagram	consists	of	Tui	below	and	Kên	above.	The	depth	of	the	lake	is	decreased	in	favor	of	the
height	of	the	mountain.	The	top	line	of	the	lower	trigram	is	decreased	in	favor	of	the	top	line	of	the	upper
trigram.	In	both	cases,	what	is	(below	is	decreased	in	favor	of	what	is	above,	and	this	means	out-and-out
decrease.
When	decrease	has	reached	its	goal,	flowering	is	sure	to	begin.	Hence	DECREASE	is	the	beginning	of

flowering,	as	INCREASE,	through	fullness,	ushers	in	decline.
Appended	Judgments
DECREASE	 shows	 the	 cultivation	 of	 character.	 It	 shows	 first	what	 is	 difficult	 and	 then	what	 is

easy.	Thus	it	keeps	harm	away.
THE	JUDGMENT
DECREASE	combined	with	sincerity
Brings	about	supreme	good	fortune
Without	blame.
One	may	be	persevering	in	this.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
How	is	this	to	be	carried	out?
One	may	use	two	small	bowls	for	the	sacrifice.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
DECREASE.	What	 is	below	 is	decreased,	what	 is	above	 is	 increased;	 the	direction	of	 the	way	 is

upward.
“DECREASE	combined	with	sincerity	brings	about	supreme	good	fortune	without	blame.	One	may

be	persevering	in	this.	It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.	How	is	this	to	be	carried	out?	One	may
use	two	small	bowls	for	the	sacrifice.”

“Two	small	bowls”	is	in	accord	with	the	time.	There	is	a	time	for	decreasing	the	firm,	and	a	time
for	increasing	the	yielding.	In	decreasing	and	increasing,	in	being	full	and	being	empty,	one	must	go
with	the	time.
The	 firm	 top	 line	of	 the	 lower	 trigram	 is	decreased,	 that	 is,	 replaced	by	a	yielding	 line;	at	 the	same

time,	the	yielding	top	 line	of	 the	upper	trigram	is	 increased,	 that	 is,	replaced	by	a	strong	 line,	and	this
strong	line	makes	its	way	upward.	The	upper	element	is	enriched	at	the	expense	of	the	lower.	Those	below
bring	 a	 sacrifice	 to	 the	 ruler.	 If	 this	 sacrifice	 is	 offered	 sincerely	 it	 is	 not	 wrong;	 rather,	 it	 results	 in
success	and	all	things	desirable.	Nor	is	thrift	then	a	disgrace.	All	that	matters	is	that	things	should	happen
at	the	right	time.

THE	IMAGE
At	the	foot	of	the	mountain,	the	lake:
The	image	of	DECREASE.
Thus	the	superior	man	controls	his	anger
And	restrains	his	instincts.

The	 lake	 evaporates;	 its	 waters	 decrease	 and	 benefit	 the	 mountain’s	 vegetation,	 which	 thereby	 is
furthered	 in	 its	growth	and	enriched.	Anger	rises	mountain	high;	 the	 instincts	drown	the	heart	 like	 the
depths	 of	 a	 lake.	 Inasmuch	 as	 the	 two	 primary	 trigrams	 represent	 the	 youngest	 son	 and	 youngest
daughter,	passions	are	especially	 strong.	The	anger	aroused	must	be	 restrained	by	keeping	still	 (upper
trigram	Kên),	and	the	instincts	must	be	curbed	by	the	confining	quality	of	the	lower	trigram	Tui,	as	the
lake	confines	its	waters	within	its	banks.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Going	quickly	when	one’s	tasks	are	finished
Is	without	blame.
But	one	must	reflect	on	how	much	one	may	decrease	others.
b)	“Going	quickly	when	one’s	tasks	are	finished”:	this	is	right	because	the	mind	of	the	one	above



accords	with	one’s	own.
The	lowest	line	stands	for	people	of	the	lower	classes.	Though	strong	itself,	it	stands	in	the	relationship

of	correspondence	to	the	weak	six	in	the	fourth	place,	which	represents	an	official.	The	one	above	needs
help	from	the	one	below,	and	it	is	readily	offered	by	the	latter.	Instead	of	the	word	for	“finished”	the	word
for	 “through”	 or	 “with”	 appears	 in	 old	 texts	 (cf.	 the	Shuo	Wên,1	where	 the	wording	 is	 cited);	 thus	 the
sentence	would	read:	“Going	quickly	with	services”—i.e.,	to	help	the	one	above—”is	without	blame.”	This
means	self-decrease	on	the	part	of	the	one	below	for	the	benefit	of	the	one	above.	The	second	half	of	the
line,	which	reads	literally,	“One	must	weigh	how	much	one	may	decrease	him,”	refers	to	the	one	above,
who	claims	the	services	of	the	one	below.	It	 is	his	duty	to	weigh	in	his	mind	how	much	he	may	require
without	injuring	the	one	below.	Only	when	this	is	the	attitude	of	the	one	above	does	it	fit	in	with	the	self-
sacrifice	of	the	one	below.	If	the	one	above	should	make	inconsiderate	demands,	the	joy	in	giving	felt	by
the	one	below	would	be	decreased.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	furthers.
To	undertake	something	brings	misfortune.
Without	decreasing	oneself,
One	is	able	to	bring	increase	to	others.
b)	That	the	nine	in	the	second	place	furthers	through	perseverance	is	due	to	the	fact	that	it	has

the	correct	mean	in	its	mind.
The	nine	is	strong	and	stands	in	a	central	place.	Hence	perseverance	in	this	attitude	serves	to	further.

The	 line	 stands	at	 the	beginning	of	 the	nuclear	 trigram	Chên,	 the	Arousing.	This	would	 suggest	 that	 it
might	 of	 its	 own	 initiative	 go	 to	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 with	 which	 it	 has	 a	 relationship	 of
correspondence.	If	it	did	this,	however,	it	would	demean	itself	somewhat.	It	is	in	keeping	with	its	central
position	to	increase	the	other	without	decreasing	itself.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	When	three	people	journey	together,
Their	number	decreases	by	one.
When	one	man	journeys	alone,
He	finds	a	companion.
b)	If	a	person	should	seek	to	journey	as	one	of	three,	mistrust	would	arise.

The	 text	 says	 that	 three	persons	 journeying	 together	are	decreased	by	one,	but	one	man	 journeying
alone	finds	a	companion.	This	refers	to	the	change	that	has	taken	place	within	the	lower	trigram.	At	the
outset	it	consisted	of	the	three	strong	lines	of	the	trigram	Ch’ien,	the	Creative.	They	have	been	journeying
together.	Then	one	leaves	them	and	goes	up	to	the	top	of	the	upper	trigram.	The	weak	line	entering	the
third	place	in	its	stead	is	lonely	in	the	company	of	the	two	other	lines	of	the	lower	trigram.	But	it	stands	in
the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	strong	line	at	the	top,	hence	finds	its	complement	in	the	latter.
Through	 this	 separation,	 three	become	 two;	 further,	 through	 the	union	one	becomes	 two.	Thus	what	 is
excessive	is	decreased,	and	what	is	insufficient	is	increased.	Through	this	process	of	interchange	between
the	trigrams	Ch’ien	and	K’un	of	the	original	hexagram,	there	come	into	being	the	two	youngest	children,
Kên	and	Tui.
On	 the	other	hand,	 the	present	 line,	 the	 six	 in	 the	 third	place,	which	 is	 lonely	 in	 the	 lower	 trigram,

should	not	again	consider	going	along	with	the	other	two,	for	this	would	give	rise	to	misunderstandings.
Confucius	says	about	this	line:

“Heaven	and	earth	come	together,	and	all	things	take	shape	and	find	form.	Male	and	female	mix
their	seed,	and	all	creatures	take	shape	and	are	born.	In	the	Book	of	Changes	it	is	said:	‘When	three
people	 journey	 together,	 their	number	decreases	by	one.	When	one	man	 journeys	alone,	he	 finds	a
companion.’	This	refers	to	the	effect	of	becoming	one.”

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	If	a	man	decreases	his	faults,
It	makes	the	other	hasten	to	come	and	rejoice.
No	blame.
b)	“If	a	man	decreases	his	faults,”	it	is	indeed	something	that	gives	cause	for	joy.

The	fault	of	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	excessive	weakness.	A	weak	line	in	a	weak	place,	it	is	inclosed
above	and	below	by	weak	 lines.	However,	 through	 its	relationship	of	correspondence	to	 the	strong	 first
line,	these	faults	are	compensated.	Through	elimination	of	these	faults,	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	hastens
the	helpful	coming	of	the	nine	at	the	beginning,	which	brings	joy	to	both	and	is	not	a	mistake.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Someone	does	indeed	increase	him.
Ten	pairs	of	tortoises	cannot	oppose	it.
Supreme	good	fortune.
b)	The	supreme	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	comes	from	its	being	blessed	from	above.

If	he	is	enriched,	ten	pairs	of	tortoise	shells	cannot	oppose	it,	and	supreme	good	fortune	comes.	The
number	 ten	 is	 suggested	by	 the	nuclear	 trigram	K’un.	The	 tortoise	belongs	 to	 the	 trigram	Li—which	of
course	can	be	read	into	this	hexagram	only	by	straining	the	point	considerably.	A	large	tortoise	used	for
fortune	 telling	 costs	 twenty	 cowrie	 shells.	 A	 double	 cowrie	 shell	 is	 called	 a	 pair.	 Accordingly,	 one



explanation	takes	the	line	to	mean	a	tortoise	worth	ten	pairs	of	cowrie	shells.	Another	explanation	reads	it
as	 referring	 to	 ten	 pairs	 of	 tortoise	 shells.	 Blessing	 from	 above	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 strong	 top	 line
covering	the	hexagram	protectively.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	If	one	is	increased	without	depriving	others,
There	is	no	blame.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
One	obtains	servants
But	no	longer	has	a	separate	home.
b)	Without	decreasing,	he	is	increased;	that	is,	he	attains	his	will	in	great	measure.

The	top	line	is	enriched	by	the	six	in	the	third	place.	It	accepts	this	increase,	but	in	such	a	way	that	the
other	 is	not	decreased	by	 it.	Therefore	 the	 relationship	here	 is	 the	opposite	of	 that	 represented	by	 the
nine	in	the	second	place,	which	increases	others	without	decreasing	itself.	Hence	the	outlook	is	favorable
throughout,	because	harmony	is	maintained	between	those	above	and	those	below.
Kên,	mountain,	denotes	a	house.	As	 the	 line	 changes,	 the	upper	primary	 trigram	Kên	 turns	 into	 the

trigram	K’un,	which	knows	no	house,	 i.e.,	 no	mountain,	 its	place	being	 the	 southwest;	hence	 there	are
loyal	helpers,	but	not	for	promoting	family	interests.



42.	I	/	Increase

The	 idea	of	 increase	 is	here	expressed	 through	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 lowest	 line	 in	 the	upper	 trigram	 is
decreased,	whereby	the	 lowest	 line	of	 the	 lower	trigram	is	 increased.	Hence	the	six	 in	the	fourth	place
and	the	nine	in	the	first	place	are	the	constituting	rulers	of	the	hexagram.	But	since	the	decrease	above	is
at	the	hands	of	the	prince,	and	the	increase	below	is	received	by	the	official,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	and
the	six	in	the	second	place	are	the	governing	rulers	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
If	 decrease	 goes	 on	 and	 on,	 it	 is	 certain	 to	 bring	 about	 increase.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the

hexagram	of	INCREASE.
Miscellaneous	Notes
The	hexagrams	of	DECREASE	and	INCREASE	are	the	beginning	of	flowering	and	of	decline.

The	two	hexagrams	with	which	part	II	begins,	namely,	INFLUENCE	(31)	and	DURATION	(32),	after	ten
changes	become	the	hexagrams	of	DECREASE	(41)	and	INCREASE	(42)—just	as	the	first	two	hexagrams
of	part	I,	THE	CREATIVE	and	THE	RECEPTIVE,	after	ten	changes	become	the	hexagrams	of	PEACE	(11)
and	 STANDSTILL	 (12).	 PEACE	 and	 STANDSTILL	 have	 an	 inner	 connection	 with	 DECREASE	 and
INCREASE,	 because	 through	 the	 transference	 of	 a	 strong	 line—from	 the	 lower	 to	 the	 upper	 trigram,
DECREASE	develops	 from	PEACE,	and	through	the	 transference	of	a	strong	 line	 from	the	upper	 to	 the
lower	trigram,	INCREASE	develops	from	STANDSTILL.	Thus	when	in	P’i,	STANDSTILL,	the	lowest	line	of
the	upper	trigram	is	transferred	to	the	bottom,	the	resultant	new	hexagram	is	I,	INCREASE.
The	fact	that	continuous	decrease	finally	leads	to	a	change	into	its	opposite,	increase,	lies	in	the	course

of	nature,	as	can	be	perceived	in	the	waning	and	waxing	of	the	moon	and	in	all	of	the	regularly	recurring
processes	of	nature.
The	hexagram	consists	of	 the	primary	 trigrams	of	wind	and	thunder,	which	 increase	each	other.	The

decrease	above	and	the	strengthening	below	produce	a	stability	that	means	increase	for	the	whole.	This
hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

Appended	Judgments
When	Pao	Hsi’s	clan	was	gone,	 there	sprang	up	 the	clan	of	 the	Divine	Husbandman.	He	split	a

piece	of	wood	for	a	plowshare	and	bent	a	piece	of	wood	for	 the	plow	handle,	and	taught	 the	whole
world	the	advantage	of	laying	open	the	earth	with	a	plow.	He	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of
INCREASE.
Both	parts	of	the	hexagram	have	wood	for	a	symbol.	The	outer	trigram	means	penetration,	the	inner

means	movement.	Movement	combined	with	penetration	has	brought	the	greatest	increase	to	the	world.
INCREASE	shows	fullness	of	character.	INCREASE	shows	the	growth	of	fullness	without	artifices.

Thus	INCREASE	furthers	what	is	useful.
THE	JUDGMENT
INCREASE.	It	furthers	one
To	undertake	something.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
INCREASE.	Decreasing	what	is	above
And	increasing	what	is	below;
Then	the	joy	of	the	people	is	boundless.
What	is	above	places	itself	under	what	is	below:
This	is	the	way	of	the	great	light.
And	it	furthers	one	to	undertake	something:
Central,	correct,	and	blessed.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water:
The	way	of	wood	creates	success.
INCREASE	moves,	gentle	and	mild:
Daily	progress	without	limit.
Heaven	dispenses,	earth	brings	forth:
Thereby	things	increase	in	all	directions.
The	way	of	INCREASE	everywhere
Proceeds	in	harmony	with	the	time.

The	name	of	the	hexagram	is	explained	on	the	basis	of	its	structure:	increase	of	what	is	below	at	the
cost	 of	what	 is	 above	 is	 out-and-out	 increase,	 because	 it	 benefits	 the	whole	 people.	 The	 fourth	 line,	 in
descending	from	the	upper	trigram	to	the	lowest	place	in	the	lower	trigram,	shows	a	self-abnegation	that
gives	proof	of	great	clarity.	In	times	of	INCREASE	it	is	favorable	to	undertake	something,	for	the	rulers	of
the	hexagram,	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	place	and	the	six	 in	 the	second,	are	centrally	placed	and	correct—a
strong	line	in	a	strong	place	and	a	weak	line	in	a	weak	place.	Crossing	of	the	great	water	is	suggested	by
the	 upper	 trigram,	 Sun,	 which	 means	 wood	 and	 so	 gives	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 ship,	 while	 the	 lower	 trigram
guarantees	 the	 movement	 of	 the	 ship.	 The	 attributes	 of	 the	 trigrams	 Chên,	 movement,	 and	 Sun,



gentleness,	guarantee	lasting	progress.
The	 idea	of	 increase	 in	 the	cosmic	sphere	 is	expressed	 through	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 first	 line	of	heaven

(Ch’ien)	places	itself	below	the	earth	(K’un),	this	gives	rise	to	the	trigram	Chên,	in	which	all	beings	come
into	 existence.	This	 process	 of	 increase	 also	 is	 bound	up	with	 the	 right	 time,	within	which	 it	 comes	 to
consummation.

THE	IMAGE
Wind	and	thunder:	the	image	of	INCREASE.
Thus	the	superior	man:
If	he	sees	good,	he	imitates	it;
If	he	has	faults,	he	rids	himself	of	them.

Wind	and	thunder	generate	and	reinforce	each	other.	Thunder	corresponds	in	its	nature	with	the	light
principle,	which	 it	 sets	 in	motion;	wind	 is	 connected	 in	 its	nature	with	 the	 shadowy	principle,	which	 it
breaks	up	and	dissolves.	What	is	light	corresponds	to	the	good,	which	is	attained	by	moving	toward	it,	in
accordance	with	the	trigram	Chên.	The	shadowy	corresponds	to	evil,	which	is	destroyed	by	being	broken
up	and	dissolved,	as	Sun,	wind,	breaks	up	clouds.	Both	principles	further	increase,	for	in	the	moral	realm
the	good	is	the	equivalent	of	the	light,	the	positive,	and	furthering	of	this	principle	signifies	increase.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	It	furthers	one	to	accomplish	great	deeds.
Supreme	good	fortune.	No	blame.
b)	“Supreme	good	fortune.	No	blame.”	Those	below	do	not	use	it	for	their	own	convenience.

The	nine	at	the	bottom	stands	for	the	common	people.	In	that	the	six	in	the	fourth	place,	the	minister,
descends	 (it	 stands	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 first	 line),	 it	 enables	 the	 lower	 line	 to
accomplish	great	things,	because	it	does	not	selfishly	retain	for	itself	the	grace	bestowed	on	it	from	above.
This	line	is	at	the	bottom	of	the	trigram	Chên	and	therefore	moves	upward.	Hence	the	great	good	fortune.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Someone	does	indeed	increase	him;
Ten	pairs	of	tortoises	cannot	oppose	it.
Constant	perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
The	king	presents	him	before	God.
Good	fortune.
b)	“Someone	does	indeed	increase	him.”	This	comes	from	without.

The	increase	of	the	inner	trigram	comes	from	without.	Therefore	it	is	regarded	as	being	unexpected,	a
spontaneous	 happening.	 The	 hexagram	 I	 is	 the	 hexagram	 Sun	 inverted,	 hence	 the	 text	 of	 this	 line
corresponds	with	that	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	of	the	preceding	hexagram.	Increase	comes	because	its
prerequisites	 are	 provided	 in	 the	 line’s	 own	 correctness,	 central	 position,	 and	 yielding	 nature,	 and
because	the	strong	nine	in	the	fifth	place	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	it.	The	admonition	to
constant	 perseverance	 is	 necessary	 because	 the	 yielding	 quality	 of	 the	 line,	 in	 combination	 with	 the
yielding	place,	might	lead	to	a	certain	weakness,	which	must	be	balanced	by	firmness	of	will.	The	increase
here	 is	 threefold—through	men,	 through	gods	 (indicated	by	 the	 tortoises,	 through	which	 the	will	of	 the
gods	is	revealed),	and	through	the	supreme	Lord	of	Heaven,	who	graciously	receives	the	man	brought	to
him	at	the	sacrifice.	The	hexagram	I	refers	to	the	first	month,	in	which	the	rites	of	sacrifice	were	carried
out	in	the	meadow.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	One	is	enriched	through	unfortunate	events.
No	blame,	if	you	are	sincere
And	walk	in	the	middle,
And	report	with	a	seal	to	the	prince.
b)	“One	is	enriched	through	unfortunate	events.”	This	is	something	that	certainly	is	one’s	due.

This	 is	 a	 weak	 line	 in	 a	 strong	 place,	 at	 the	 high	 point	 of	 excitement	 (lower	 trigram	 Chên),	 and
furthermore	 not	 central.	 All	 this	 points	 to	misfortune.	 But	 since	 it	 is	 the	 time	 of	 INCREASE,	 even	 this
misfortune,	which	is	not	accidental	but	comes	upon	one	from	inner	causes,	must	serve	to	good	ends.	The
line	is	in	the	center	of	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	K’un	and	at	the	same	time	at	the	top	of	the	lower	primary
trigram	Chên,	movement,	which	gives	rise	to	the	idea	of	movement,	of	walking	the	middle	path.	The	seal
is	a	round	jade	piece	that	was	bestowed	as	a	badge	of	office.
One	 interpretation	explains	 the	 line	of	 thought	as	 follows:	 If	 in	 the	 time	of	 INCREASE	heaven	sends

disaster,	such	as	crop	failure	and	the	like,	a	sympathetic	prince	will	ease	the	burden	of	those	affected	by
granting	them	remission	of	taxes	and	other	relief,	and	the	official	who	announces	this	remission	carries
the	jade	insignia	as	a	mark	of	his	authority.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	If	you	walk	in	the	middle
And	report	to	the	prince,
He	will	follow.
It	furthers	one	to	be	used
In	the	removal	of	the	capital.
b)	“If	you	report	to	the	prince,	he	will	follow,”	because	his	purposes	are	thereby	increased.



The	fourth	place	is	that	of	the	minister.	The	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	the	lowest	line	of	the	trigram	Sun,
wind,	penetration.	The	line	has	influence	in	correspondence	with	this.	However,	since	it	is	in	the	middle	of
the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	it	does	not	use	this	influence	for	personal	ends,	for	this	is	the	line	whose
decrease	increases	the	lower	trigram.	It	therefore	represents	a	man	who,	as	mediator	between	the	prince
and	the	people,	is	in	a	position	to	make	the	will	of	the	former	clear	to	the	latter.	Persons	of	this	kind	are	of
great	importance	in	dangerous	and	decisive	undertakings	(crossing	the	great	water—here	the	moving	of
the	capital,	which	took	place	five	times	under	the	Shang	dynasty).

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	If	in	truth	you	have	a	kind	heart,	ask	not.
Supreme	good	fortune.
Truly,	kindness	will	be	recognized	as	your	virtue.
b)	“If	in	truth	you	have	a	kind	heart,	ask	not.”	If	kindness	is	recognized	as	your	virtue,	you	have

attained	your	purpose	completely.
The	 ruler	of	 the	hexagram,	 strong	and	central	 in	a	correct,	 strong	place,	has	a	 truly	kind	heart	and

seeks	 to	give	 increase	 to	 those	below.	Here	 there	 is	no	question:	 the	effect	 is	 inevitably	 favorable,	and
because	the	good	intention	is	recognized,	all	is	well.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	brings	increase	to	no	one.
Indeed,	someone	even	strikes	him.
He	does	not	keep	his	heart	constantly	steady.
Misfortune.
b)	“He	brings	increase	to	no	one.”	This	is	a	saying	that	pictures	one-sidedness.
“Someone	even	strikes	him.”	This	comes	from	without.

This	line	is	obdurate	and	not	consistently	concerned	with	bringing	increase	to	those	below.	Despite	its
relation	to	the	six	 in	the	third	place,	the	 latter	shows	no	sign	of	being	 influenced	by	 it.	Thus	the	 line	 is
one-sided	 and	 aloof.	Without	 intent	 on	 the	 part	 of	 anyone,	 this	 wrong	 position	 automatically	 provokes
misfortune,	because	the	attitude	of	the	line	is	not	stable,	that	is,	not	in	harmony	with	the	demands	of	the
time.



43.	Kuai	/	Break-through	(Resoluteness)

The	meaning	of	the	hexagram	is	based	on	the	fact	that	a	dark	line	is	at	the	top,	in	the	outermost	place,
hence	the	six	at	the	top	is	the	constituting	ruler.	But	the	five	light	lines	turn	resolutely	against	the	dark
one.	The	fifth	line	is	at	their	head,	and	furthermore	in	the	place	of	honor;	therefore	the	nine	in	the	fifth
place	is	the	governing	ruler	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
If	 increase	goes	on	unceasingly,	 there	 is	certain	 to	be	a	break-through.	Hence	there	 follows	the

hexagram	of	BREAK-THROUGH.	Break-through	means	resoluteness.
Miscellaneous	Notes
BREAK-THROUGH	means	resoluteness.	The	strong	turns	resolutely	against	the	weak.
Appended	Judgments
In	primitive	times	people	knotted	cords	in	order	to	govern.	The	holy	men	of	a	later	age	introduced

written	documents	instead,	as	a	means	of	governing	the	various	officials	and	supervising	the	people.
They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram	of	BREAK-THROUGH.
The	hexagram	Kuai	actually	means	a	break-through	as	when	a	river	bursts	its	dams	in	seasons	of	flood.

The	five	strong	lines	are	thought	of	as	mounting	from	below,	resolutely	forcing	the	weak	upper	line	out	of
the	hexagram.	The	same	idea	evolves	from	the	images.	The	lake	has	evaporated	and	mounted	to	the	sky.
There	it	will	discharge	itself	as	a	cloudburst.	Here	again	we	have	the	idea	of	a	break-through.
The	hexagram	consists	of	the	trigram	Tui,	words,	above,	and	Ch’ien,	whose	attribute	is	strength,	below.

Thus	the	hexagram	indicates	that	words	should	be	made	strong	and	enduring.
THE	JUDGMENT
BREAK-THROUGH.	One	must	resolutely	make	the	matter	known
At	the	court	of	the	king.
It	must	be	announced	truthfully.	Danger.
It	is	necessary	to	notify	one’s	own	city.
It	does	not	further	to	resort	to	arms.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
BREAK-THROUGH	is	the	same	as	resoluteness.	The	firm	resolutely	dislodges	the	yielding.	Strong

and	joyous—this	means	resolute	and	harmonious.
“One	must	make	the	matter	known	at	the	court	of	the	king.”	The	weak	rests	upon	five	hard	lines.
Truthful	announcement	is	fraught	with	danger.	However,	this	danger	leads	to	the	light.
“It	 is	 necessary	 to	 notify	 one’s	 own	 city.	 It	 does	 not	 further	 to	 resort	 to	 arms.”	What	 that	man

holds	high	comes	to	nothing.
“It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something,”	because	the	firm	grow	and	lead	through	to	the	end.

In	forcing	out	the	dark	line	at	the	top	it	is	essential	that	it	be	done	in	the	right	spirit.	For	the	issue	of
this	 struggle	 is	 not	 in	 doubt.	 What	 happens	 is	 inevitable,	 therefore	 a	 serenely	 cheerful	 and	 calm
resoluteness	 is	 the	 correct	 attitude	 of	mind,	 as	 denoted	by	 the	 character	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams	 (Tui,	 the
Joyous,	without,	and	Ch’ien,	the	Creative,	strength,	within).	One	must	make	the	truth	known	at	the	court
of	 the	king:	 the	weak	six	at	 the	 top	stands	over	 five	strong	 lines,	of	which	 the	uppermost	occupies	 the
place	of	the	prince.	The	weak	line	symbolizes	an	inferior	man	in	a	high	position.	The	trigram	Tui	means
mouth;	hence	the	making	known,	announcing.	Ch’ien	also	means	battle	and	danger;	Ch’ien	and	Tui	both
mean	metal,	hence	the	image	of	weapons.	But	since	the	situation	in	 itself	promises	success,	there	is	no
need	of	using	weapons	against	outside	forces.

THE	IMAGE
The	lake	has	risen	up	to	heaven:
The	image	of	BREAK-THROUGH.
Thus	the	superior	man
Dispenses	riches	downward
And	refrains	from	resting	on	his	virtue.

The	 lake	 has	 evaporated	 and	 its	waters	 are	 gathering	 high	 in	 the	 heavens	 as	mist	 and	 clouds:	 this
points	to	an	imminent	break-through,	in	which	the	water	will	come	down	again	as	rain.	In	order	to	avoid	a
violent	break-through,	it	is	necessary	to	take	advantage	of	the	attributes	of	the	two	trigrams.	Tui	means
pleasure;	therefore,	instead	of	piling	up	wealth	in	dangerous	places	and	thus	inviting	a	breach,	one	will	be
continuously	giving	and	 thus	causing	 joy.	 In	 self-education	we	should	be	mindful	of	 the	 stern	 judgment
meted	out	by	Ch’ien.	Then	we	shall	never	be	self-satisfied,	which	would	also	lead	to	catastrophe,	but	shall
always	retain	a	sense	of	awe.	When	joy	has	mounted	high,	as	a	lake	mounts	to	the	heavens,	it	easily	leads
to	 excessive	 pride;	 hence	 it	 must	 be	 supplemented	 by	 the	 beneficent	 way	 of	 heaven.	 When	 strength
perceives	weakness	above	it,	as	does	heaven	under	the	lake,	it	leads	easily	to	defiance;	hence	it	must	be
moderated	by	the	friendly	way	of	Tui.

THE	LINES



Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Mighty	in	the	forward-striding	toes.
When	one	goes	and	is	not	equal	to	the	task,
One	makes	a	mistake.
b)	When	one	goes	without	being	equal	to	the	task,	it	is	a	mistake.

Toes	are	suggested	by	the	lowest	line.	The	hexagram	of	BREAK-THROUGH	is	the	next	stage	after	the
hexagram	of	THE	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT	(34).	This	is	why	the	pronouncement	on	the	lowest	line	is	the
same	in	both,	except	that	here	it	is	moderated	somewhat,	because	the	situation	has	developed	further.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	A	cry	of	alarm.	Arms	at	evening	and	at	night.
Fear	nothing.
b)	Despite	weapons,	no	fear—because	one	has	found	the	middle	way.

Tui,	 the	 upper	 trigram,	 means	 mouth,	 hence	 the	 cry	 of	 alarm.	 Tui	 is	 in	 the	 west,	 which	 indicates
evening;	 Ch’ien	 is	 in	 the	 northwest,	which	 indicates	 night.	Metal	 is	 associated	 both	with	 Tui	 and	with
Ch’ien,	and	this	indicates	weapons.	But	there	is	nothing	to	fear,	because	the	line	is	strong	and	central	and
in	the	middle	of	the	lower	trigram	Ch’ien,	heaven.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	To	be	powerful	in	the	cheekbones
Brings	misfortune.
The	superior	man	is	firmly	resolved.
He	walks	alone	and	is	caught	in	the	rain.
He	is	bespattered,
And	people	murmur	against	him.
No	blame.
b)	“The	superior	man	is	resolutely	resolved.”	Ultimately	this	is	not	a	mistake.

Ch’ien	 is	 the	head.	The	third	place	 is	at	 the	top	of	 this	 trigram,	hence	the	 image	of	 the	cheekbones.
This	line	belongs	to	the	strong	primary	trigram	Ch’ien	and	also	stands	in	the	middle	of	the	lower	nuclear
trigram	Ch’ien,	 hence	 the	 redoubled	 resolution.	 It	 is	 solitary	 because	 it	 alone	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of
correspondence	to	the	dark	line	at	the	top.	Tui,	as	water,	suggests	the	idea	of	rain	bespattering	the	line.
The	 strength	 of	 its	 nature	 protects	 it	 from	 contamination	 by	 the	 dark	 line	 above,	 hence	 despite	 evil
appearances	there	is	no	mistake.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	There	is	no	skin	on	his	thighs,
And	walking	comes	hard.
If	a	man	were	to	let	himself	be	led	like	a	sheep,
Remorse	would	disappear.
But	if	these	words	are	heard
They	will	not	be	believed.
b)	Walking	comes	hard.”	The	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.
“If	these	words	are	heard	they	will	not	be	believed.”	There	is	no	clear	comprehension.

This	line	is	in	the	lowest	place	of	the	upper	trigram,	hence	the	image	of	the	thighs.	The	fact	that	the
line	is	hindered	in	its	forward	push	by	the	strong	line	in	the	fifth	place	suggests	the	idea	that	walking	is
impossible.	A	symbol	of	Tui	is	the	sheep,	hence	the	advice	to	let	oneself	be	led	like	a	sheep.	As	the	line
changes,	the	upper	trigram	will	turn	into	the	trigram	K’an,	which	means	ear;	but	since	the	line	is	neither
correct	nor	in	its	proper	place,	it	pays	no	heed	to	what	is	said.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	In	dealing	with	weeds,
Firm	resolution	is	necessary.
Walking	in	the	middle
Remains	free	of	blame.
b)	“Walking	in	the	middle	remains	free	of	blame.”	The	middle	is	not	yet	in	the	light.

The	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram.	It	is	this	line	that	must	lead	the	resolute	struggle	against	the	six
at	the	top,	which	symbolizes	the	inferior	man.	But	while	the	nine	in	the	third	place	is	in	the	relationship	of
correspondence	to	the	six	above,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	is	in	the	relationship	of	holding	together	with
it.	This	makes	the	struggle	more	difficult.	But	the	line	can	be	resolute.	It	is	on	the	one	hand	the	ruler	of
the	hexagram,	and	moreover	ruler	in	the	most	distinguished	place;	on	the	other	hand	it	is	the	top	line	of
the	vigorous	upper	nuclear	trigram	Ch’ien.	Furthermore,	it	is	in	the	middle	of	the	upper	primary	trigram;
thus	there	is	a	hope	that	it	will	succeed	in	remaining	consistent.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	No	cry.
In	the	end	misfortune	comes.
b)	The	misfortune	of	not	crying	out	should	in	the	end	not	be	allowed	to	persist.

This	line	is	the	representative	of	the	evil	that	is	to	be	rooted	out.	The	undertaking	requires	caution.	It



appears	easy,	because	there	are	five	strong	lines	as	against	only	one	weak	line;	but	the	dark	nature	of	the
present	line	suggests	that	it	knows	how	to	silence	those	who	would	raise	the	warning.	However,	its	kind
must	not	be	tolerated;	otherwise	it	is	to	be	feared	that	from	the	neglected	solitary	yin	line,	evil	will	sprout
forth	as	from	a	seed.



44.	Kou	/	Coming	to	Meet

The	hexagram	of	COMING	TO	MEET	 takes	 its	meaning	 from	 the	one	dark	 line	 that	develops	at	 the
bottom;	therefore	this	first	line	is	the	constituting	ruler	of	the	hexagram.	But	the	five	yang	lines	have	the
duty	 of	 restraining	 the	 yin	 power.	 Among	 the	 five,	 the	 second	 and	 the	 fifth	 have	 a	 strong	 and	 central
character.	The	one	stands	near	to	the	yin	power	in	order	to	restrain	it,	the	other	holds	the	place	of	honor
and	comes	down	from	above	to	restrain	it.	Therefore	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	in	the	second
are	the	governing	rulers	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
Through	resoluteness	one	is	certain	to	encounter	something.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of

COMING	TO	MEET.	Coming	to	meet	means	encountering.
Miscellaneous	Notes
COMING	TO	MEET	means	encountering.

Coming	 to	 meet	 means	 encountering.	 The	 lower	 trigram	 is	 Sun,	 wind,	 which	 drives	 along	 beneath
Ch’ien,	 heaven,	 the	 upper	 trigram,	 and	 hence	 encounters	 all	 things.	 Furthermore,	 a	 yin	 line	 develops
below,	so	that	the	dark	principle	thus	unexpectedly	encounters	the	light.	The	movement	is	initiated	by	the
dark	principle,	the	feminine,	which	advances	to	meet	the	light	principle,	the	masculine.	This	hexagram	is
the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
COMING	TO	MEET.	The	maiden	is	powerful.
One	should	not	marry	such	a	maiden.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
COMING	TO	MEET	means	encountering.	The	weak	advances	to	meet	the	firm.
“One	should	not	marry	such	a	maiden.”	This	means	that	one	cannot	live	with	her	permanently.
When	heaven	and	earth	meet,	all	creatures	settle	into	firm	lines.
When	the	firm	finds	the	middle	and	the	right,	everything	under	heaven	prospers	splendidly.
Great	indeed	is	the	meaning	of	the	time	of	COMING	TO	MEET.

Sun	 is	 the	 eldest	daughter.	A	 yin	 line	develops	within	 and	 rules	 the	hexagram,	while	 the	 yang	 lines
stand	aside	as	guests.	In	this	way	the	yin	element	becomes	increasingly	powerful.	This	is	the	line	of	the
trigram	K’un	of	which	 it	 is	said:	“When	there	 is	hoarfrost	underfoot,	solid	 ice	 is	not	 far	off.”	Hence	the
gradual	expansion	must	be	checked	in	time,	for	the	way	of	inferior	people	increases	only	because	superior
men	entrust	them	with	power.	If	this	is	avoided	when	the	inferior	element	first	appears,	the	danger	can	be
averted.

When	 the	strong	element	appears	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	midst	of	yin	 lines,	 the	hexagram	 is	called
RETURN.	The	superior	man	always	stays	where	he	belongs.	He	comes	only	into	his	own	domain.	When	the
weak	 element	 first	 appears	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 yang	 lines,	 the	 hexagram	 is	 called	 COMING	 TO	 MEET	 (or
ENCOUNTERING).	The	inferior	man	always	has	to	depend	on	a	lucky	chance.

Marriage	is	an	institution	that	is	meant	to	endure.	But	if	a	girl	associates	with	five	men,	her	nature	is
not	pure	and	one	cannot	live	with	her	permanently.	Therefore	one	should	not	marry	her.

However,	things	that	must	be	avoided	in	human	society	have	meaning	in	the	processes	of	nature.	Here
the	 meeting	 of	 earthly	 and	 heavenly	 forces	 is	 of	 great	 significance,	 because	 at	 the	 moment	 when	 the
earthly	 force	enters	and	 the	heavenly	 force	 is	at	 its	height—in	 the	 fifth	month—all	 things	unfold	 to	 the
high	point	of	their	material	manifestation,	and	the	dark	force	cannot	injure	the	light	force.	The	two	rulers
of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	in	the	second,	likewise	symbolize	such	a	fortunate
meeting.	Here	a	strong	and	central	assistant	meets	a	strong,	central,	and	correct	ruler.	A	great	flowering
results,	 and	 the	 inferior	 element	 below	 can	 do	 no	 harm.	 Thus	 it	 is	 an	 important	 time,	 the	 time	 of	 the
meeting	of	the	light	with	the	dark.

THE	IMAGE
Under	heaven,	wind:
The	image	of	COMING	TO	MEET.
Thus	does	the	prince	act	when	disseminating	his	commands
And	proclaiming	them	to	the	four	quarters	of	heaven.

The	prince	 is	symbolized	by	the	upper	trigram	Ch’ien,	heaven.	His	commands	are	symbolized	by	the
lower	trigram	Sun,	wind,	whose	attribute	is	penetration.	The	spreading	to	the	four	quarters	of	heaven	is
symbolized	by	the	wind	driving	along	under	heaven.

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	It	must	be	checked	with	a	brake	of	bronze.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
If	one	lets	it	take	its	course,	one	experiences	misfortune.
Even	a	lean	pig	has	it	in	him	to	rage	around.



b)	To	check	with	a	brake	of	bronze.	This	means	that	it	is	the	way	of	the	weak	to	be	led.
The	brake	is	below.	K’un,	in	which	this	is	the	first	line,	means	a	wagon;	Ch’ien	is	metal,	by	means	of

which	the	wagon	is	to	be	braked	underneath.	This	braking	brings	good	fortune,	because	it	accords	with
the	truth	that	a	weak	thing	unable	to	guide	itself	must	be	led.	If	we	give	it	free	rein,	misfortune	befalls	us.
This	shows	the	trend	of	the	whole	hexagram.	The	line	is	compared	to	a	pig	that	is	as	yet	weak	and	lean
but	that	will	later	tear	about:	this	likewise	refers	to	the	yin	nature	of	the	line.	The	pig	belongs	to	water,	in
particular	to	the	yin	aspect	of	water.	It	is	worth	noting	that	this	line	comes	into	account	only	as	an	object
acted	upon.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	There	is	a	fish	in	the	tank.	No	blame.
Does	not	further	guests.
b)	“There	is	a	fish	in	the	tank.”	It	is	a	duty	not	to	let	it	reach	the	guests.

The	fish	likewise	belongs	to	the	yin	principle.	The	reference	is	to	the	six	at	the	beginning.	This	six	is	in
the	 relationship	 of	 correspondence	 to	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fourth	 place,	 the	 “guest.”	 But	 through	 this
relationship	the	yin	element	would	penetrate	too	far	into	the	hexagram.	Therefore	the	six	at	the	beginning
is	 held	 captive,	 like	 a	 fish	 in	 a	 tank,	 by	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place,	 the	 loyal	 official,	 who	 has	 a
relationship	 of	 holding	 together	 with	 it.	 As	 a	 result	 all	 goes	 well.	 It	 is	 to	 be	 noted	 that	 the	 word	 here
rendered	by	“tank”	includes	the	idea	that	the	yin	element	is	treated	in	a	perfectly	friendly	way.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	There	is	no	skin	on	his	thighs,
And	walking	comes	hard.
If	one	is	mindful	of	the	danger,
No	great	mistake	is	made.
b)	“Walking	comes	hard.”	He	still	walks	without	being	led.

Since	this	hexagram	is	structurally	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one,	the	present	line	corresponds	with
the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	in	Kuai.	Hence	the	similarity	in	text.	But	the	inner	attitudes	are	different:	in
the	former	there	is	a	resolute	intention	to	press	upward	in	order	to	throw	out	the	dark	line	above,	here	a
desire	to	meet	the	dark	line	below.	But	this	dark	line	has	already	been	taken	into	custody	by	the	nine	in
the	second	place,	so	that	a	meeting—which	indeed	would	be	disastrous—is	not	possible.	The	proximity	of
the	 line	 to	 the	 upper	 trigram	 Ch’ien	 makes	 it	 possible	 to	 recognize	 the	 danger,	 but	 desire	 remains
unsatisfied.	Hence	the	unsatisfactoriness	of	the	situation,	although	serious	mistakes	are	avoided.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	No	fish	in	the	tank.
This	leads	to	misfortune.
b)	The	misfortune	inhering	in	the	fact	that	there	is	no	fish	in	the	tank	comes	from	his	having	kept

aloof	from	the	people.
The	 fourth	 place	 is	 that	 of	 the	 minister.	 The	 six	 at	 the	 beginning	 stands	 here	 for	 the	 inferior,	 lowly

people.	There	 is	 a	 relationship	of	 correspondence	between	 the	 two	 lines.	Furthermore,	 it	would	be	 the
duty	of	the	official	to	keep	in	touch	with	the	people.	But	this	has	been	neglected.	The	line	belongs	to	the
trigram	Ch’ien,	hence	strives	upward,	away	from	the	people	below.	By	doing	this	it	attracts	misfortune	to
itself.	The	corresponding	nine	in	the	third	place	of	the	preceding	hexagram	is	also	isolated,	but	there	the
inner	attitude	is	correct,	here	it	is	not.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	A	melon	covered	with	willow	leaves.
Hidden	lines.
Then	it	drops	down	to	one	from	heaven.
b)	The	nine	in	the	fifth	place	hides	its	lines,	for	it	is	in	the	middle	and	correct.
“Then	 it	 drops	 down	 to	 one	 from	 heaven,”	 because	 the	 will	 does	 not	 give	 up	 what	 has	 been

ordained.
This	 line	 is	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 standing	 as	 a	 prince	 in	 its	 correct	 and	 honored	 place	 in	 the

middle,	and	referred	to	by	the	words	of	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“When	the	firm	finds	the	middle
and	the	right.”	Ch’ien	is	round,	hence	symbolizes	a	round	fruit.	Here	the	fruit	is	a	melon;	it	represents	the
yin	 line	 at	 the	beginning	and	 so	belongs	 to	 the	dark	principle.	 It	 is	 protected	and	 covered	with	willow
leaves.	No	forcible	interference	takes	place.	The	regulative	lines	of	the	laws	upon	which	the	beauty	of	life
depends	are	covered	over.	We	entrust	the	fruit	in	our	care	entirely	to	its	own	natural	development.	Then	it
ripens	of	its	own	accord.	It	falls	to	our	lot.	This	is	not	contrived	but	is	decreed	by	our	accepted	fate.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	comes	to	meet	with	his	horns.
Humiliation.	No	blame.
b)	“He	comes	to	meet	with	his	horns.”	At	the	top	it	comes	to	an	end,	hence	humiliation.

Ch’ien	 is	 the	 head,	 here	 the	 highest	 place,	 which	 is	 moreover	 hard,	 hence	 the	 image	 of	 horns.	 The
orientation	of	the	line	is	quite	different	from	that	of	the	first	line,	which	it	should	go	to	meet.	It	meets	the
first	line	with	harshness,	hence	an	understanding	is	extremely	difficult.	This	leads	to	humiliation.	But	one
does	not	try	to	force	a	meeting,	hence	one	withdraws	without	blame.



45.	Ts’ui	/	Gathering	Together	[Massing]

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	and,	secondarily,	the	nine	in	the	fourth.	Only
these	two	yang	lines	are	in	high	places.	They	gather	all	the	yin	lines	around	them.

The	Sequence
When	 creatures	 meet	 one	 another,	 they	 mass	 together.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

GATHERING	TOGETHER.	Gathering	together	means	massing.
Miscellaneous	Notes
GATHERING	TOGETHER	means	massing.

In	the	two	light	lines,	of	which	one	is	in	the	place	of	the	prince	or	father,	and	the	other	in	the	place	of
the	minister	or	son,	the	hexagram	has	a	strong	focus	for	gathering	together	the	other	lines,	all	of	which
belong	 to	 the	 dark	 principle.	 While	 the	 two	 primary	 trigrams,	 K’un	 and	 Tui	 (crowd	 and	 joyousness),
indicate	the	basis	of	the	gathering	together,	the	two	nuclear	trigrams	have	the	meaning	of	standing	still
(Kên)	and	exerting	influence	(Sun),	which	likewise	indicates	gathering	together.

THE	JUDGMENT
GATHERING	TOGETHER.	Success.
The	king	approaches	his	temple.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
This	brings	success.	Perseverance	furthers.
To	bring	great	offerings	creates	good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
GATHERING	TOGETHER	means	massing.	Devoted	and	at	the	same	time	joyous.
The	strong	stands	in	the	middle	and	finds	correspondence.	Therefore	the	others	mass	around	it.
“The	king	approaches	his	temple.”	This	brings	about	reverence	and	success.
“It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.	This	brings	success.”	The	massing	takes	place	on	a	correct

basis.
“To	bring	great	offerings	creates	good	fortune.	It	furthers	one	to	undertake	something,”	for	that	is

devotion	to	the	command	of	heaven.
By	observing	what	they	gather	together,	one	can	behold	the	relationships	of	heaven	and	earth	and

of	all	creatures.
The	strong	line	in	the	fifth	place	represents	the	king,	the	great	man,	whom	it	is	favorable	to	see.	Below

him	 is	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Kên,	meaning	mountain	 and	 house.	 By	 his	 side	 there	 stands	moreover	 the
strong	line	in	the	fourth	place,	that	of	the	minister.	The	mountain	indicates	perseverance.	Mountain	and
temple	are	both	places	where	great	offerings	are	brought.	Wind,	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	means
the	influence	of	what	is	above,	as	a	result	of	which	works	begun	will	meet	with	success.

The	name	of	the	hexagram	is	explained	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision	in	a	number	of	ways:	(1)
the	attributes	of	the	two	trigrams	are	devotion	and	joyousness,	on	the	basis	of	which	gathering	together
takes	place;	(2)	a	gathering	needs	a	head,	a	center	of	crystallization,	and	this	is	provided	in	the	nine	in	the
fifth	place,	around	which	the	other	 lines	gather.	In	order	to	gather	the	people	together,	the	ruler	above
needs	joyousness	(Tui);	the	people	below	show	themselves	devoted	(K’un).

There	is	in	addition	a	reference	to	religion	as	the	basis	of	gathering	together	in	a	community.	Heaven	is
the	bond	of	union	in	nature,	as	the	ancestors	are	the	bond	of	union	among	men.	If	one	knows	these	forces,
all	relationships	become	clear.

THE	IMAGE
Over	the	earth,	the	lake:
The	image	of	GATHERING	TOGETHER.
Thus	the	superior	man	renews	his	weapons
In	order	to	meet	the	unforeseen.

The	juxtaposition	of	the	two	trigrams	provides	the	image	of	GATHERING	TOGETHER.	In	that	the	lake
is	over	 the	earth	and	 therefore	 threatens	 to	overflow,	 the	danger	 connected	with	gathering	 together	 is
also	 indicated.	 The	 primary	 trigrams	 and	 the	 nuclear	 trigrams,	 taken	 individually,	 show	 how	 these
dangers	are	to	be	met.	Tui	means	metal,	hence	weapons.	K’un	means	renewal	(earth	produces	metal).	The
nuclear	trigram	Sun	means	the	penetrating,	the	unforeseen.	The	nuclear	trigram	Kên	means	keeping	still,
obstruction.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	If	you	are	sincere,	but	not	to	the	end,
There	will	sometimes	be	confusion,	sometimes	gathering	together.
If	you	call	out,
Then	after	one	grasp	of	the	hand	you	can	laugh	again.
Regret	not.	Going	is	without	blame.



b)	“Sometimes	confusion,	sometimes	gathering	together.”	The	will	is	in	confusion.
The	 weak	 line	 at	 the	 beginning	 is	 not	 yet	 stabilized.	 To	 be	 sure,	 there	 is	 a	 relationship	 of

correspondence	with	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fourth	place—indicating	 sincerity—but	 since	 the	 line	 is	associated
with	the	two	other	weak	lines	of	K’un,	it	allows	itself	to	be	influenced	by	these,	so	that	its	natural	relations
with	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	are	disturbed.	This	brings	confusion.	But	a	call	(Tui	is	mouth,	hence	call)
suffices	 to	 do	 away	 with	 the	 misunderstanding,	 and	 laughter	 comes	 again	 (Tui	 is	 joyousness).	 It	 is
important,	however,	to	hold	to	the	upward	direction.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Letting	oneself	be	drawn
Brings	good	fortune	and	remains	blameless.
If	one	is	sincere,
It	furthers	one	to	bring	even	a	small	offering.
b)	 “Letting	 oneself	 be	 drawn	 brings	 good	 fortune	 and	 remains	 blameless.”	 The	 middle	 is	 still

unchanged.
Here	there	is	a	strong	inner	relationship	of	correspondence	with	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	the	ruler	of

the	hexagram.	Therefore	this	line	is	naturally	attracted	by	the	strong	line.	Since	it	is	central,	it	does	not
permit	itself	to	be	wrongly	influenced	by	its	environment.	Hence	this	inner	influence	takes	effect.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Gathering	together	amid	sighs.
Nothing	that	would	further.
Going	is	without	blame.
Slight	humiliation.
b)	“Going	is	without	blame.”	The	Gentle	is	above.

This	 line	 has	 no	 relationship	 of	 correspondence,	 hence	 the	 sighs,	 the	 forlornness	 and	 helplessness.
Since	the	line	belongs	to	the	lower	trigram,	the	relationship	of	holding	together	with	the	nine	in	the	fourth
place	does	not	become	effective,	for	the	latter	line	belongs	to	the	upper	trigram.	However,	a	connection	is
established	 through	 the	upper	nuclear	 trigram	Sun,	 the	Gentle,	 for	 the	six	 in	 the	 third	place	 forms	 the
lowest	line	in	this	nuclear	trigram,	of	which	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	the	center.	Thereby	going,	as
well	as	a	connection,	becomes	possible	without	blame,	even	though	some	humiliation	remains.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Great	good	fortune.	No	blame,.
b)	“Great	good	fortune.	No	blame,”	for	the	place	demands	nothing.1

This	line	occupies	the	place	of	the	minister,	who	brings	about	the	gathering	together	on	behalf	of	his
prince,	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	But	 he	 does	 not	 claim	 the	merit	 of	 it	 for	 himself;	 hence	 great	 good
fortune.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	If	in	gathering	together	one	has	position,
This	brings	no	blame.
If	there	are	some	who	are	not	yet	sincerely	in	the	work,
Sublime	and	enduring	perseverance	is	needed.
Then	remorse	disappears.
b)	If	in	gathering	together	one	has	only	position,	the	will	does	not	yet	shine	forth	sufficiently.

Essentially	 the	 requisite	 position	 for	 effecting	 the	 gathering	 together	 is	 at	 hand.	 But	 there	 are
difficulties.	The	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	Keeping	Still,	works	in	such	a	way	that	the	effects	on	the	lower	lines
do	not	immediately	make	themselves	felt.	Therefore	an	enduring	influence	is	needed.	To	the	influence	of
the	position	must	be	added	 the	 influence	of	personality.	This	 line	according	 to	 its	 character	belongs	 to
Ch’ien,	hence	it	is	sublime.	This	character	must	need	acquire	enduring	form;	hence	remorse	disappears.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Lamenting	and	sighing,	floods	of	tears.
No	blame.
b)	“Lamenting	and	sighing,	floods	of	tears.”	He	is	not	tranquil	at	the	top.

The	top	line	has	no	relationship	of	correspondence	(cf.	the	six	in	the	third	place),	hence	the	lamenting
and	 the	 tears.	However,	 there	 is	no	blame;	 for	 though	 the	 line	 is	not	 tranquil	 in	 its	exalted	yet	solitary
position,	it	conforms	to	the	relationship	of	holding	together	and	turns	downward	toward	the	ruler	of	the
hexagram,	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 The	 gathering	 together	 is	 achieved	 because	 the	 idea	 that	 it	 is
favorable	to	see	the	great	man	accords	with	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.



46.	Shêng	/	Pushing	Upward

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	The	Commentary	on	the	Decision	refers	to	it	as
follows:	“The	yielding	pushes	upward	with	the	time.”	The	six	 in	the	fifth	place	 is	the	most	honored	 line
among	those	pushing	up.	However,	the	pushing	up	certainly	begins	at	the	bottom.	The	hexagram	pictures
wood	growing	within	the	earth.	But	the	six	at	the	beginning	is	the	ruler	of	the	trigram	Sun	and	the	root	of
wood;	therefore	it	is	at	least	a	constituting	ruler	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
Massing	toward	the	top	is	called	pushing	upward.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	PUSHING

UPWARD.
Miscellaneous	Notes
That	which	pushes	upward	does	not	come	back.

On	the	face	of	it	this	hexagram	is	very	favorably	organized.	The	movement	of	the	upper	trigram	K’un	is
downward,	hence	the	lower	trigram.	Sun	(penetration,	wood)	strives	unhindered	toward	the	top.	However,
the	 pushing	 upward	 is	 neither	 as	 easy	 nor	 as	 extensive	 as	 the	 rising	 of	 the	 sun	 in	 the	 hexagram	 of
PROGRESS	(35).	The	upward	movement	is	furthermore	reinforced	by	the	nuclear	trigrams,	Chên	and	Tui,
both	of	which	tend	upward.	This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
PUSHING	UPWARD	has	supreme	success.
One	must	see	the	great	man.
Fear	not.
Departure	toward	the	south
Brings	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
The	yielding	pushes	upward	with	the	time.	Gentle	and	devoted.
The	firm	is	in	the	middle	and	finds	correspondence,	hence	it	attains	great	success.
“One	must	see	the	great	man.	Fear	not,”	for	it	brings	blessing.
“Departure	toward	the	south	brings	good	fortune.”	What	is	willed	is	done.

The	yielding	element	that,	borne	by	the	time,	pushes	upward,	is	the	yielding	line	at	the	beginning;	it
stands	for	the	root	of	wood,	the	lower	trigram.	The	lower	trigram	is	gentle,	the	upper	devoted.	These	are
preconditions	 of	 the	 time	 that	 make	 it	 possible	 for	 the	 strong	 line	 in	 the	 second	 place—which	 finds
correspondence	in	the	weak	line	in	the	place	of	the	ruler—to	achieve	great	success.	It	is	said,	“One	must
see	the	great	man,”	and	not,	“It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man,”	as	is	usually	the	case.	For	the	ruler	of
the	hexagram	is	not	the	great	man;	it	is,	on	the	contrary,	a	yielding	line.	The	reason	for	success	is	not	an
earthly	but	a	 transcendental	one.	Therefore	 it	 is	 said	 further,	 “Fear	not,”	and,	 “It	brings	blessing.”	The
favorableness	of	the	conditions	comes	from	the	invisible	world;	we	must	make	the	most	of	them,	however,
through	work.	Departure	toward	the	south	means	work.	The	south	is	the	region	of	the	heavens	between
Sun	and	K’un,	the	two	components	of	the	hexagram.

THE	IMAGE
Within	the	earth,	wood	grows:
The	image	of	PUSHING	UPWARD.
Thus	the	superior	man	of	devoted	character
Heaps	up	small	things
In	order	to	achieve	something	high	and	great.

The	 heaping	 up	 of	 small	 things—steady,	 imperceptible	 progress—is	 suggested	 by	 the	 gradual	 and
invisible	growth	of	wood	in	the	earth.	“Devoted	character”	corresponds	with	the	trigram	K’un;	“something
high	and	great”	corresponds	with	Sun,	whose	image	is	a	tree.

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Pushing	upward	that	meets	with	confidence
Brings	great	good	fortune.
b)	“Pushing	upward	that	meets	with	confidence	brings	great	good	fortune”:	those	above	agree	in

purpose.
The	yielding	line	at	the	beginning	agrees	in	nature	with	the	yielding	lines	of	the	upper	trigram	K’un.

Therefore	 it	 meets	 with	 confidence	 and	 has	 success	 in	 its	 pushing	 upward,	 just	 as	 the	 hidden	 root
connects	the	tree	with	the	earth,	and	through	this	connection	makes	growth	possible.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	If	one	is	sincere,
It	furthers	one	to	bring	even	a	small	offering.1
No	blame.
b)	The	sincerity	of	the	nine	in	the	second	place	brings	joy.



This	line	is	the	lowest	in	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	meaning	joy.	The	oracle	is	the	same	as	that	pertaining
to	the	second	line	in	the	preceding	hexagram.	In	the	latter	a	weak	line	is	intimately	connected	with	the
king	in	the	fifth	place;	here	a	strong	line	has	an	equally	intimate	relation	with	the	weak	line	in	the	fifth
place.	 In	 each	 case	 the	 spiritual	 affinity	 is	 so	 close	 that	 gifts	 may	 be	 small	 in	 extrinsic	 value	 without
disturbing	mutual	confidence.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	One	pushes	upward	into	an	empty	city.
b)	“One	pushes	upward	into	an	empty	city”:	there	is	no	reason	to	hesitate.

This	 is	a	 strong	 line	 in	a	 strong	place;	 it	 is	moreover	at	 the	beginning	of	 the	upper	nuclear	 trigram
Chên,	movement.	Furthermore,	before	it	are	the	divided	lines	of	the	trigram	K’un,	as	though	empty	and
open,	so	that	they	offer	no	obstruction	to	progress.	This	easy	progress	might	cause	hesitation,	but	as	 it
accords	with	the	time,	the	main	thing	is	to	press	forward	and	take	advantage	of	the	time.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	king	offers	him	Mount	Ch’i.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.
b)	“The	king	offers	him	Mount	Ch’i.”	This	is	the	way	of	the	devoted.

This	is	a	weak	line	in	a	weak	place.	It	stands	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	Tui,	which	means	the	west,	and
so	may	suggest	Mount	Ch’i.	The	king	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place;	the	present	line	represents	the	minister.
The	king	is	like-minded,	and	therefore	makes	it	possible	for	him	to	work	effectively.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
One	pushes	upward	by	steps.
b)	 “Perseverance	 brings	 good	 fortune.	 One	 pushes	 upward	 by	 steps.”	 One	 achieves	 one’s	 will

completely.
From	 the	 first	 line	 to	 this,	 the	 pushing	 upward	 proceeds	 step	 by	 step.	 The	 first	 line	 meets	 with

confidence,	the	second	needs	small	sacrifices	only,	the	third	pushes	up	into	a	deserted	city,	and	the	fourth
finally	gains	admittance	even	to	realms	beyond:	these	are	steps	of	a	progress	all	summed	up	in	the	ruler
of	 the	hexagram.	At	 this	point,	with	 such	brilliant	 success	achieved,	 it	 is	 of	 the	greatest	 importance	 to
remain	persevering.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Pushing	upward	in	darkness.
It	furthers	one
To	be	unremittingly	persevering.
b)	“Pushing	upward	in	darkness.”	At	the	top	is	decrease	and	not	wealth.

This	 line	 is	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 trigram	K’un	 and	 cannot	 advance	 farther.	 Culmination	 of	 the	 shadowy
indicates	 darkness.	When	 one	 can	 no	 longer	 distinguish	 things,	 one	must	 hold	 fast	 that	 perseverance
which	lies	below	consciousness,	in	order	not	to	lose	one’s	way.



47.	K’un	/	Oppression	(Exhaustion)

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	nine	in	the	second	place	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth.	The	idea	of	the
hexagram	is	based	on	the	penning	in	of	the	firm	element.	The	second	and	the	fifth	line	are	by	nature	firm
and	central,	and	each	is	inclosed	between	dark	lines.	Hence	both	these	lines	are	constituting	as	well	as
governing	rulers	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
If	one	pushes	upward	without	stopping,	he	is	sure	to	meet	with	oppression.	Hence	there	follows

the	hexagram	of	OPPRESSION.
Miscellaneous	Notes
OPPRESSION	means	an	encounter.

Oppression	is	something	that	happens	by	chance.	The	fact	that	there	is	no	water	in	the	lake	is	due	to
certain	exceptional	conditions.

Appended	Judgments
OPPRESSION	 is	 the	 test	of	character.	OPPRESSION	 leads	 to	perplexity	and	 thereby	 to	success.

Through	OPPRESSION	one	learns	to	lessen	one’s	rancor.
The	hexagram	is	full	of	danger	in	its	structure—a	lake,	with	an	abyss	opening	under	it,	through	which

the	water	flows	off	downward.	Wind	and	fire,	as	the	nuclear	trigrams,	are	likewise	at	work,	oppressing	the
water	from	within.	The	forces	trend	in	opposite	directions.	K’an,	the	lower	trigram,	sinks	downward,	while
Tui,	 the	 upper,	 evaporates	 upward.	 As	 regards	 the	 lines,	 the	 yang	 element	 is	 oppressed	 by	 the	 yin
element.	The	two	upper	strong	lines	are	hemmed	in	by	two	weak	ones,	and	so	likewise	is	the	middle	line
of	the	lower	trigram.

THE	JUDGMENT
OPPPRESSION.	Success.	Perseverance.
The	great	man	brings	about	good	fortune.
No	blame.
When	one	has	something	to	say,
It	is	not	believed.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
OPPRESSION.	The	firm	is	hemmed	in.	Danger	and	joyousness.	The	superior	man	alone	is	capable

of	being	oppressed	without	losing	the	power	to	succeed.
“Perseverance.	The	great	man	brings	about	good	fortune,”	because	he	is	firm	and	central.
“When	one	has	something	to	say,	it	is	not	believed.”	He	who	considers	the	mouth	important	falls

into	perplexity.
The	 name	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 explained	 in	 its	 structure,	 because	 in	 various	ways	 the	 firm	 lines	 are

hemmed	 in	 between	 dark	 ones.	 Success	 is	 achieved	 in	 the	 time	 of	 OPPRESSION	 by	 maintaining
cheerfulness	(upper	trigram	Tui)	in	face	of	danger	(lower	trigram	K’an).	The	firm	and	central	lines	that	in
each	case	 indicate	the	great	man	are	the	rulers	of	 the	hexagram	in	the	second	and	the	fifth	place.	The
trigram	 Tui	 also	 suggests	 speech.	 But	 one	 gets	 no	 hearing;	 the	 trigram	 K’an	 means	 earache,	 hence
disinclination	to	listen.

THE	IMAGE
There	is	no	water	in	the	lake:
The	image	of	EXHAUSTION.
Thus	the	superior	man	stakes	his	life
On	following	his	will.

The	 Image	derives	 from	 the	 relative	positions	 of	 the	 two	primary	 trigrams:	water	 is	 under	 the	 lake,
therefore	 drained	 off.	 The	 trigrams	 individually	 yield	 advice	 for	 conduct	 in	 the	 time	 of	 EXHAUSTION:
K’an,	abyss,	danger,	indicates	staking	one’s	life;	Tui,	joyousness,	indicates	following	one’s	own	will.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	One	sits	oppressed	under	a	bare	tree
And	strays	into	a	gloomy	valley.
For	three	years	one	sees	nothing.
b)	“One	strays	into	a	gloomy	valley.”	One	is	gloomy	and	not	clear.

The	trigram	K’an	stands	in	the	north,	where	gloom	prevails.	The	nuclear	trigram	is	Li,	clarity.	The	line
stands	outside	of	clarity.	In	other	cases	the	first	line	images	the	foot,	the	toes.	But	in	times	of	oppression	a
man	sits;	 therefore	 the	 first	 line	here	represents	 the	buttocks.	The	gloomy	valley	 is	 the	 first	 line	 in	 the
trigram	K’an,	the	pit	in	the	abyss.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	One	is	oppressed	while	at	meat	and	drink.
The	man	with	the	scarlet	knee	bands	is	just	coming.
It	furthers	one	to	offer	sacrifice.



To	set	forth	brings	misfortune.
No	blame.
b)	“Oppressed	while	at	meat	and	drink.”	The	middle	brings	blessing.

K’an	is	wine,	Tui	food.	The	man	with	the	scarlet	knee	bands	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	the	ruler	(the
nuclear	 trigram	Sun,	 in	which	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 is	 the	 top	 line,	means	 leg).	 Between	 the	 two
rulers	 of	 the	hexagram—the	prince,	 the	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 and	 the	 official,	 the	nine	 in	 the	 second
place—the	significant	relationship	is	that	of	congruity	rather	than	that	of	correspondence.	Accordingly,	it
is	a	matter	not	of	natural	but	of	supranatural	relationships,	and	therefore	the	religious	act	of	sacrifice	is
mentioned.	Since	 it	accords	with	 the	 time,	going	to	 the	prince	who	 is	kindred	 in	spirit	 is	 in	 itself	not	a
mistake,	 but	 it	 cannot	 be	 done,	 because	 the	 six	 in	 the	 third	 place	 obstructs	 the	 way	 and	 makes	 it
dangerous.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	A	man	permits	himself	to	be	oppressed	by	stone,
And	leans	on	thorns	and	thistles.
He	enters	his	house	and	does	not	see	his	wife.
Misfortune.
b)	“He	leans	on	thorns	and	thistles”:	he	rests	on	a	hard	line.
“He	enters	his	house	and	does	not	see	his	wife”:	this	bodes	misfortune.

The	oppression	that	afflicts	this	line	is	due	to	the	hard	line	below	it	and	to	the	hard	line	above,	which	is
like	a	stone	over	it.	Thus	it	can	neither	progress	nor	retreat.	It	represents	a	man	holding	the	wrong	office
and	hence	in	an	untenable	position.	The	appended	judgments	therefore	allude	directly	to	imminent	death;
this	is	what	the	text	under	b	refers	to	in	the	words	“bodes	misfortune.”

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	comes	very	quietly,	oppressed	in	a	golden	carriage.
Humiliation,	but	the	end	is	reached.
b)	“He	comes	very	quietly”:	his	will	is	directed	downward.	Though	the	place	is	not	appropriate,	he

nevertheless	has	companions.
K’an	is	a	carriage,	Tui	metal.	This	line	is	in	the	minister’s	place	and	therefore	has	the	task	of	relieving

the	 oppression.	 The	minister	 allows	himself	 to	 be	 influenced	by	 the	honor	 of	 having	 received	 a	 golden
carriage	at	 the	hands	of	 the	prince,	 so	 that	he	does	not	 fulfill	 his	 task	as	quickly	as	he	 should.	This	 is
humiliating;	yet	in	the	end	all	goes	well.	The	line	is	not	in	its	proper	place	{the	place	is	yielding,	the	line
firm),	but	it	is	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	six	at	the	beginning,	toward	which	its	will	is
directed,	and	therefore	it	has	a	companion	that	induces	it	to	act.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	His	nose	and	feet	are	cut	off.
Oppression	at	the	hands	of	the	man	with	the	purple	knee	bands.
Joy	comes	softly.
It	furthers	one	to	make	offerings	and	libations.
b)	Cutting	off	of	the	nose	and	feet	means	that	he	does	not	yet	attain	his	will.
“Joy	comes	softly,”	because	the	line	is	straight	and	central.
“It	furthers	one	to	make	offerings	and	libations.”	Thus	one	attains	good	fortune.

The	line	is	hemmed	in	by	dark	lines.	Above	it	is	a	dark	line.	When	it	tries	to	do	away	with	this	line,	the
effect	 is	 as	 though	 its	 nose	were	 being	 cut	 off.	When	 it	 tries	 to	 turn	 downward,	 it	 finds	 there	 another
obstructing	line,	the	six	in	the	third	place;	when	it	tries	to	remove	this	line,	the	effect	is	as	though	its	feet
were	 being	 cut	 off.	 Therefore	 it	 cannot	 carry	 out	 its	 purpose.	Nor	 is	 the	 official,	 with	whom	 it	 has	 “a
relationship	 of	 congruity,	 in	 a	 position	 to	 come	 to	 its	 help,	 because	 the	 latter	 also	 is	 penned	 in	 and
oppressed	by	dark	lines.	However,	the	strong	nature	of	both	guarantees	final	success.	Here	too,	as	in	the
case	of	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	sacrifice	is	mentioned.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	is	oppressed	by	creeping	vines.
He	moves	uncertainly	and	says,	“Movement	brings	remorse.”
If	one	feels	remorse	over	this	and	makes	a	start,
Good	fortune	comes.
b)	“He	is	oppressed	by	creeping	vines.”	That	is,	he	is	not	yet	suitable.
“Movement	brings	remorse.”	If	there	is	remorse,	this	is	an	auspicious	change.

A	weak	line	at	the	peak	of	oppression—this	is	not	yet	the	suitable	way.	But	through	movement	and	the
awakening	within	of	the	requisite	insight,	one	frees	oneself	from	oppression.	Hence	the	prospect	of	good
fortune	when	the	time	of	OPPRESSION	comes	to	an	end.



48.	Ching	/	The	Well

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place:	The	influence	of	the	well	depends	on	water,	and
the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 is	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 trigram	 K’AN,	 water.	 The	 meaning	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is
nourishment	 of	 the	 people,	 and	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 is	 the	 prince	 who	 provides	 them	 with
nourishment.

The	Sequence
He	who	is	oppressed	above	is	sure	to	turn	downward.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	THE

WELL.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	WELL	means	union.
Appended	Judgments
THE	WELL	shows	the	field	of	character.	THE	WELL	abides	in	its	place,	yet	has	influence	on	other

things.	THE	WELL	brings	about	discrimination	as	to	what	is	right.
The	well	remains	in	its	place;	it	has	a	firm,	never-failing	foundation.	Similarly,	character	must	have	a

deep	 foundation	 and	 a	 lasting	 connection	with	 the	 springs	 of	 life.	 The	well	 itself	 does	 not	 change,	 yet
through	 the	water	 that	 is	 drawn	 from	 it,	 it	 exerts	 a	 far-reaching	 influence.	 The	well	 is	 the	 image	 of	 a
tranquil	dispensing	of	bounty	to	all	who	approach	it.	Character	likewise	must	be	tranquil	and	clear,	so	that
ideas	of	what	is	right	can	become	clear.	This	hexagram	refers	to	nourishment,	like	Hsü,	WAITING	(5),	 I,
THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH	 (27),	 and	Ting,	 THE	CALDRON	 (50).	 THE	WELL	 refers	 to	 the	water
necessary	for	nourishment,	as	indispensable	to	life.

The	two	nuclear	trigrams	tend	to	rise.	Hence	the	text	 lines	 indicate,	 from	the	first	 line	upward,	ever
increasing	 clarification	 and	 auspiciousness	 in	 the	 situations,	 in	 contrast	 to	 the	 danger	 indicated	 in	 the
judgment	on	the	hexagram	as	a	whole.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	WELL.	The	town	may	be	changed,
But	the	well	cannot	be	changed.
It	neither	decreases	nor	increases.
They	come	and	go	and	draw	from	the	well.
If	one	gets	down	almost	to	the	water
And	the	rope	does	not	go	all	the	way,
Or	the	jug	breaks,	it	brings	misfortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
Penetrating	under	water	and	bringing	up	the	water:	this	is	THE	WELL.
The	well	nourishes	and	is	not	exhausted.
“The	 town	 may	 be	 changed,	 but	 the	 well	 cannot	 be	 changed,”	 because	 central	 position	 is

combined	with	firmness.
“If	 one	 gets	 down	 almost	 to	 the	water	 and	 the	 rope	 does	 not	 go	 all	 the	way,”	 one	 has	 not	 yet

achieved	anything.
“If	the	jug	breaks”:	this	brings	misfortune.

It	 seems	 as	 though	 the	 text	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 commentary	 were	 somewhat	 incomplete.	 Yet
nothing	of	the	essential	meaning	has	been	lost.	The	first	half	of	the	Judgment	refers	to	the	nature	of	the
well.	It	is	the	unchangeable	within	change.	The	upper	trigram	K’an	indicates	a	well,	and	the	lower	trigram
Sun	symbolizes	a	town.	The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	in	the	upper	trigram,	hence	the	idea	of	no	change.
The	second	half	of	the	text	refers	to	the	dangers	connected	with	using	the	well.	The	trigram	Sun	means	a
rope,	the	nuclear	trigram	Li	a	hollow	vessel,	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui	means	to	break	in	pieces.	In	this	way
the	danger	of	breaking	the	jug	is	indicated.

The	 hexagram	 also	 contains	 a	 symbolic	 meaning.	 Just	 as	 water	 in	 its	 inexhaustibility	 is	 the	 basic
requisite	of	life,	so	the	“way	of	kings”—good	government—is	the	indispensable	foundation	of	the	life	of	the
state.	Place	and	time	may	change,	but	the	methods	for	regulating	the	collective	life	of	the	people	remain
forever	 the	same.	Evil	conditions	arise	only	when	the	right	people	are	not	at	hand	to	execute	 the	plan.
This	is	symbolized	by	the	shattering	of	the	jug	before	it	has	reached	the	water.

THE	IMAGE
Water	over	wood:	the	image	of	THE	WELL.
Thus	the	superior	man	encourages	the	people	at	their	work,
And	exhorts	them	to	help	one	another.

The	well	symbolism	in	the	Image	is	again	applied	to	government,	the	well	itself	being	regarded	as	the
center	of	the	social	structure.	There	 is	 likewise	an	allusion	to	the	agrarian	system	ascribed	to	remotest
antiquity.	In	this	system	the	fields	were	so	divided	that	eight	families	with	their	fief	lands	were	grouped
around	a	center	that	held	the	well	and	the	settlement,	and	that	had	to	be	cultivated	 in	common	for	the
benefit	of	the	central	government.	The	form	of	the	settlement	was	suggested	in	the	ideogram	for	ching,	



.	The	fields	were	divided	as	follows:

Fields	 1	 to	 8	 were	 used	 by	 the	 individual	 families;	 field	 9	 contained	 the	 well,	 together	 with	 the
settlement	and	the	lord’s	fields.	Under	this	arrangement,	the	members	of	the	settlement	naturally	had	to
rely	on	co-operative	work.

The	influence	of	the	government	on	the	people	is	suggested	by	the	two	trigrams.	Encouragement	of	the
people	 at	 their	 work	 corresponds	 with	 the	 trigram	 K’an,	 which	 symbolizes	 work	 or	 drudgery	 (lao).
Exhortation	corresponds	with	the	trigram	Sun,	which	denotes	dissemination	of	commands.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	One	does	not	drink	the	mud	of	the	well.
No	animals	come	to	an	old	well.
b)	“One	does	not	drink	the	mud	of	the	well”:	it	is	too	far	down.
“No	animals	come	to	an	old	well”:	time	forsakes	it.

The	line	is	weak	and	at	the	very	bottom,	hence	the	idea	of	mud	in	the	well.	It	is	hidden	by	the	firm	line
in	the	second	place,	hence	the	idea	that	no	animals	come.	It	remains	quite	outside	the	movement.	Time
passes	it	by.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	At	the	wellhole	one	shoots	fishes.
The	jug	is	broken	and	leaks.
b)	“At	the	wellhole	one	shoots	fishes”:	he	has	no	one	to	do	it	with	him.

This	line	in	itself	is	strong	and	central,	but	it	is	not	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	ruler	of
the	hexagram.	The	 trigram	Sun	means	 fishes.	The	upper	nuclear	 trigram	Li	means	 jug;	 the	 lower,	Tui,
means	to	break	in	pieces,	hence	the	broken	jug.

This	 line	 is	so	 to	speak	 the	antithesis	of	 the	ruler	of	 the	hexagram.	 It	 is	 the	place	referred	 to	 in	 the
second	half	of	the	Judgment	(concerning	the	broken	jug).

The	 phrase,	 “At	 the	 wellhole	 one	 shoots	 fishes,”	 here	 translated	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 old
commentaries,	was	later	also	interpreted	to	mean:	“The	water	of	the	wellspring	bubbles	only	for	fishes.”
The	Chinese	character	shê,	shooting,	also	means	figuratively	the	shooting	forth	of	a	ray.	In	any	case,	the
meaning	is	that	the	water	is	not	used	by	human	beings	for	drinking.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	well	is	cleaned,	but	no	one	drinks	from	it.
This	is	my	heart’s	sorrow,
For	one	might	draw	from	it.
If	the	king	were	clear-minded,
Good	fortune	might	be	enjoyed	in	common.
b)	“The	well	is	cleaned,	but	no	one	drinks	from	it.”	This	is	the	sorrow	of	the	active	people.
They	beg	that	the	king	may	be	clear-minded,	in	order	to	attain	good	fortune.

This	 line	 is	strong	and	at	the	top	of	the	 lower	trigram,	therefore	the	well	 is	cleaned.	No	relationship
exists	between	the	lower	and	the	upper	trigram,	hence	the	isolation.	Within,	however,	there	are	unifying
tendencies,	because	both	nuclear	trigrams	in	their	movement	indicate	upward	direction:	hence	the	regret
of	 the	 active	 people	 (represented	 by	 these	 nuclear	 trigrams)	 and	 the	 hope	 that	 the	 king	may	 become
clear-minded.	The	king	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	which	is	connected	with
the	present	line	through	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Li,	clarity.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	well	is	being	lined.	No	blame.
b)	“The	well	is	being	lined.	No	blame,”	because	the	well	is	being	put	in	working	order.

The	line	has	a	relationship	of	holding	together	with	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	in	the	fifth	place,	hence
the	idea	that	the	well	is	being	reconditioned,	made	fit	to	receive	the	spring	water	from	the	nine	in	the	fifth
place.	Here	 the	minister	 is	 in	 immediate	proximity	 to	 the	prince,	who	works	 together	with	him	 for	 the
good	of	all.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	In	the	well	there	is	a	clear,	cold	spring
From	which	one	can	drink.
b)	Drinking	from	the	clear,	cold	spring	depends	on	its	central	and	correct	position.

Here	we	have	the	ruler	of	 the	hexagram.	It	 is	 the	 light	 line	between	the	two	dark	ones	 in	the	upper
trigram	and	represents	the	water	within	the	well	rim;	hence	the	idea	of	the	clear,	cold	spring.	As	ruler	of
the	hexagram,	it	stands	at	the	disposal	of	the	others	because	of	its	central,	correct	position.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	One	draws	from	the	well
Without	hindrance.



It	is	dependable.
Supreme	good	fortune.
b)	“Supreme	good	fortune.”	In	the	top	place,	this	means	great	perfection.

The	line	is	at	the	top,	that	is,	where	the	well	water	can	be	used	by	people.	The	rising	of	the	water	to
the	top	makes	it	possible	to	use	the	well.	Because	of	this,	the	line	marks	the	completion	of	the	hexagram;
this	is	why	the	augury	of	great	good	fortune	is	added.1



49.	Ko	/	Revolution	(Molting)

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	for	a	man	must	be	in	an	honored	place	in	order
to	have	the	authority	to	bring	about	a	revolution.	One	who	is	central	and	correct	is	able	to	bring	out	all
the	good	of	such	a	revolution.	Therefore	it	is	said	of	this	line:	“The	great	man	changes	like	a	tiger.”

The	Sequence
The	setup	of	a	well	must	necessarily	be	revolutionized	in	the	course	of	time.	Hence	there	follows

the	hexagram	of	REVOLUTION.
A	 well	 must	 be	 cleaned	 out	 from	 time	 to	 time	 or	 it	 will	 become	 clogged	 with	 mud.	 Therefore	 the

hexagram	 Ching,	 THE	 WELL,	 which	 means	 a	 permanent	 setup,	 is	 followed	 by	 the	 hexagram	 of
REVOLUTION,	showing	the	need	of	changes	in	long-established	institutions,	in	order	to	keep	them	from
stagnating.

Miscellaneous	Notes
REVOLUTION	means	removal	of	that	which	is	antiquated.

The	 hexagram	 is	 so	 constructed	 that	 the	 influences	 of	 the	 two	 primary	 trigrams	 are	 in	 opposition;
hence	a	revolution	develops	inevitably.	Fire	(Li),	below,	is	quickened	by	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	meaning
wind	or	wood.	The	upper	nuclear	trigram	Ch’ien	provides	the	necessary	firmness.	The	entire	movement	of
the	hexagram	is	directed	upward.

THE	JUDGMENT
REVOLUTION.	On	your	own	day
You	are	believed.
Supreme	success,
Furthering	through	perseverance.
Remorse	disappears.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
REVOLUTION.	Water	and	fire	subdue	each	other.	Two	daughters	dwell	 together,	but	their	views

bar	mutual	understanding.	This	means	revolution.
“On	your	own	day	you	are	believed”:	one	brings	about	a	revolution	and	in	doing	so	is	trusted.
Enlightenment,	and	thereby	joyousness:	you	create	great	success	through	justice.
If	in	a	revolution	one	hits	upon	the	right	thing,	“remorse	disappears.”
Heaven	and	earth	bring	about	revolution,	and	the	four	seasons	complete	themselves	thereby.
T’ang	and	Wu1	brought	about	political	revolutions	because	they	were	submissive	toward	heaven

and	in	accord	with	men.
The	time	of	REVOLUTION	is	truly	great.

Molting	depends	on	fixed	laws;	it	is	prepared	in	advance.	The	same	is	true	of	political	revolutions.	The
expression	“on	your	own	day”	points—as	in	the	case	of	the	hexagram	Ku,	WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN
SPOILED	(18)—to	one	of	the	ten	cyclic	signs.	These	ten	cyclic	signs	are:	(1)	Chia,	(2)	I,	(3)	Ping,	(4)	Ting,
(5)	Wu,2	(6)	Chi,	(7)	Kêng,	(8)	Hsin,	(9)	Jên,	(10)	Kuei.	As	noted	earlier	in	connection	with	hexagram	18,
the	 eighth	 of	 these	 signs,	 Hsin	 [metal,	 autumn],	 has	 also	 the	 secondary	meaning	 of	 renewal,	 and	 the
seventh,	Kêng,	means	change.	Now	the	sign	before	Kêng	is	Chi,	hence	it	is	on	the	day	before	the	change
takes	place	that	one	 is	believed	(therefore	the	rendering	“your	own	day”;	chi	also	means	“own”).	 If	 the
cyclic	signs	are	combined	with	the	eight	trigrams	as	correlated	with	the	cardinal	points	in	the	Sequence
of	Later	Heaven	[Inner-World	Arrangement],	it	will	be	found	that	K’un	stands	for	Chi—which	means	earth
—in	 the	 southwest,3	 midway	 between	 Tui	 in	 the	 west	 and	 Li	 in	 the	 south,	 that	 is,	 between	 the	 two
trigrams	that	combat	and	subdue	each	other.	The	earth	in	the	middle	balances	their	influences,	so	that	the
clarity	of	fire	(Li)	and	the	joyousness	of	water	(Tui)	can	manifest	themselves	separately.	Hence	the	need	of
enlightenment	and	joyousness	in	gaining	the	popular	confidence	necessary	for	a	revolution.

As	revolutions	in	nature	take	place	according	to	fixed	laws	and	thus	give	rise	to	the	cycle	of	the	year,	so
political	 revolutions—these	 can	become	necessary	at	 times	 for	doing	away	with	a	 state	of	decay—must
follow	definite	laws.	First,	one	must	be	able	to	await	the	right	moment.	Second,	one	must	proceed	in	the
right	way,	so	that	one	will	have	the	sympathy	of	the	people	and	so	that	excesses	will	be	avoided.	Third,
one	must	be	correct	and	entirely	free	of	all	selfish	motives.	Fourth,	the	change	must	answer	a	real	need.
This	was	the	character	of	the	great	revolutions	brought	about	in	the	past	by	the	rulers	T’ang	and	Wu.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	in	the	lake:	the	image	of	REVOLUTION.
Thus	the	superior	man
Sets	the	calendar	in	order
And	makes	the	seasons	clear.

Fire	 in	 the	 lake	 causes	 a	 revolution.	 The	 water	 puts	 out	 the	 fire,	 and	 the	 fire	 makes	 the	 water
evaporate.	Arrangement	of	the	calendar	is	suggested	by	Tui,	which	means	a	magician,	a	calendar	maker.
Making	clear	is	suggested	by	Li,	whose	attribute	is	clarity.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	



a)	Wrapped	in	the	hide	of	a	yellow	cow.
b)	“Wrapped	in	the	hide	of	a	yellow	cow.”	One	should	not	act	thus.

One	of	the	animals	belonging	to	the	trigram	Li	is	the	cow.	The	hide	(ko)	is	suggested	by	the	name	of	the
hexagram,	which	means	hide	or	molting.	Yellow	is	the	color	of	the	second	(middle)	line,	by	which	this	first
line	is	held	fast.	The	present	line	is	strong,	and	the	trigram	Li,	to	which	it	belongs,	presses	upward;	thus	it
might	be	tempted	to	start	a	revolution.	But	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	has	no	relationship	with	it,	nor	has
the	six	in	the	second	place,	so	that	the	moment	for	action	has	not	yet	come.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	When	one’s	own	day	comes,	one	may	create	revolution.
Starting	brings	good	fortune.
No	blame.
b)	“When	one’s	own	day	comes,	one	may	create	revolution.”	Action	brings	splendid	success.

This	line	is	correct,	central,	and	clear.	The	place	is	that	of	the	official.	As	to	connections	above,	it	is	in
the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	and	therefore
has	the	potentiality	of	successful	action.	This	is	the	moment	indicated	by	the	Judgment	as	being	right	for
winning	confidence	(as	regards	the	meaning	of	“one’s	own	day,”	chi	jih,	cf.	above).	Here	the	configuration
is	 especially	 clear:	 the	 trigram	Li	 suggests	 day,	while	 the	middle	 line	 holds	 the	 place	 representing	 the
earth,	which	stands	in	the	southwest	next	to	Li	(south).

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Starting	brings	misfortune.
Perseverance	brings	danger.
When	talk	of	revolution	has	gone	the	rounds	three	times,
One	may	commit	himself,
And	men	will	believe	him.
b)	“When	talk	of	revolution	has	gone	the	rounds	three	times,	one	may	commit	himself.”	If	not,	how

far	are	things	to	be	allowed	to	go?
This	 line	 is	 strong	 and	 clear	 and	 in	 the	 place	 of	 transition,	 but	 these	 very	 circumstances	 suggest

danger	of	too	great	haste.	Hence	one	should	wait	until	the	time	is	ripe.	The	relationship	with	the	top	line
is	 not	 taken	 into	 account,	 because	 the	 latter	 is	 already	 bound	 to	 the	 fifth	 line.	 Therefore	 going
prematurely	 would	 bring	 danger.	 If	 fire	 is	 to	 be	 effective	 against	 water,	 it	 must	 act	 with	 absolute
determination.	Success	is	possible	only	if	all	three	lines	form	a	single	unit.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Remorse	disappears.	Men	believe	him.
Changing	the	form	of	government	brings	good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	in	changing	the	form	of	government	is	due	to	the	fact	that	one’s	conviction

meets	with	belief.
As	a	strong	line	in	a	yielding	place,	this	line	is	harmoniously	balanced.	It	is	like	in	kind	to	the	ruler	of

the	hexagram	and	 in	alliance	with	him,	hence	 it	meets	with	belief.	Here	the	time	for	change	has	come.
When	 the	 text	 speaks	 not	 only	 of	 revolution	 but	 also	 of	 change	 and	 alteration,	 it	 means	 that	 while
revolution	merely	does	away	with	the	old,	the	idea	of	change	points	at	the	same	time	to	introduction	of
the	new.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	great	man	changes	like	a	tiger.
Even	before	he	questions	the	oracle
He	is	believed.
b)	“The	great	man	changes	like	a	tiger”:	his	marking	is	distinct.

This	line	is	related	to	the	six	in	the	second	place	and	therefore	has	the	clarity	of	Li	at	its	disposal.	The
trigram	Tui,	in	which	this	is	the	central	line,	stands	in	the	west,	the	place	of	the	white	tiger.	The	season	of
the	year	corresponding	with	this	trigram	is	autumn,	when	animals	change	their	coats.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	superior	man	changes	like	a	panther.
The	inferior	man	molts	in	the	face.
Starting	brings	misfortune.
To	remain	persevering	brings	good	fortune.
b)	“The	superior	man	changes	like	a	panther.”	His	marking	is	more	delicate.
“The	inferior	man	molts	in	the	face.”	He	is	devoted	and	obeys	the	prince.



50.	Ting	/	The	Caldron

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	nine	at	the	top.	The	idea	on	which	the
hexagram	Ting	 is	 based	 is	 that	 of	 the	 nourishing	 of	worthy	men.	 The	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	 honors	 the
venerable	man	represented	by	the	nine	at	the	top.	The	image	is	derived	from	the	way	in	which	the	rings
and	ears	of	the	ting1	fit	into	each	other.

The	Sequence
Nothing	 transforms	 things	 so	 much	 as	 the	 ting.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of	 THE

CALDRON.
The	transformations	wrought	by	Ting	are	on	the	one	hand	the	changes	produced	in	food	by	cooking,

and	on	the	other,	in	a	figurative	sense,	the	revolutionary	effects	resulting	from	the	joint	work	of	a	prince
and	a	sage.

Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	CALDRON	means	taking	up	the	new.

The	 hexagram	 is	 structurally	 the	 inverse	 of	 the	 preceding	 one;	 in	 meaning	 also	 it	 presents	 a
transformation.	While	Ko	treats	of	revolution	as	such	in	its	negative	aspect,	Ting	shows	the	correct	way	of
going	 about	 social	 reorganization.	 The	 two	 primary	 trigrams	 move	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 their	 action	 is
mutually	reinforcing.	The	nuclear	 trigrams	Ch’ien	and	Tui,	which	mean	metal,	complete	the	 idea	of	 the
ting	as	a	sacred	ceremonial	vessel.	These	old	bronze	vessels—as	still	occasionally	found	in	excavations—
have	been	connected	throughout	all	time	with	the	loftiest	expressions	of	Chinese	civilization.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	CALDRON.	Supreme	good	fortune.
Success.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	CALDRON	is	the	image	of	an	object.	When	one	causes	wood	to	penetrate	fire,	food	is	cooked.

The	holy	man	cooks	in	order	to	sacrifice	to	God	the	Lord,	and	he	cooks	feasts	in	order	to	nourish	the
holy	and	the	worthy.

Through	 gentleness	 the	 ear	 and	 eye	 become	 sharp	 and	 clear.	 The	 yielding	 advances	 and	 goes
upward.	It	attains	the	middle	and	finds	correspondence	in	the	firm;	hence	there	is	supreme	success.
The	whole	hexagram,	with	its	sequence	of	divided	and	undivided	lines,	is	the	image	of	a	ting,	from	the

legs	below	to	the	handle	rings	at	the	top.	The	trigram	Sun	below	means	wood	and	penetration;	Li	above
means	 fire.	Thus	wood	 is	put	 into	 fire,	 and	 the	 fire	 is	 kept	up	 for	 the	preparation	of	 the	meal.	Strictly
speaking,	 food	 is	of	course	not	cooked	 in	 the	 ting	but	 is	 served	 in	 it	after	being	cooked	 in	 the	kitchen;
nevertheless,	 the	 symbol	 of	 the	 ting	 carries	 also	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 preparation	 of	 food.	 The	 ting	 is	 a
ceremonial	vessel	reserved	for	use	in	sacrifices	and	banquets,	and	herein	lies	the	contrast	between	this
hexagram	and	Ching,	THE	WELL	(48),	which	connotes	nourishment	of	 the	people.	 In	a	sacrifice	to	God
only	one	animal	is	needed,	because	it	is	not	the	gift	but	the	sentiment	that	counts.	For	the	entertainment
of	guests	abundant	food	and	great	lavishness	are	needed.	The	upper	trigram	Li	is	eye,	the	fifth	line	stands
for	the	ears	of	the	ting;	thus	the	image	of	eye	and	ear	is	suggested.	The	lower	trigram	Sun	is	the	Gentle,
the	adaptive.	Thereby	the	eye	and	ear	become	sharp	and	clear	(clarity	is	the	attribute	of	the	trigram	Li).
The	yielding	element	that	moves	upward	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	in	the	fifth	place;	it	stands	in	the

relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	strong	assistant,	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	hence	has	success.	In
ancient	China	nine	ting	were	the	symbol	of	sovereignty,	hence	the	favorable	oracle.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	over	wood:
The	image	of	THE	CALDRON.
Thus	the	superior	man	consolidates	his	fate
By	making	his	position	correct.

Fire	over	wood	is	the	image	not	of	the	ting	itself	but	of	its	use.	Fire	burns	continuously	when	wood	is
under	 it.	 Life	 also	must	 be	 kept	 alight,	 in	 order	 to	 remain	 so	 conditioned	 that	 the	 sources	 of	 life	 are
perpetually	 renewed.	 Obviously	 the	 same	 is	 true	 of	 the	 life	 of	 a	 community	 or	 of	 a	 state.	 Here	 too
relationships	and	positions	must	be	 so	 regulated	 that	 the	 resulting	order	has	duration.	 In	 this	way	 the
decree	of	fate	whereby	rulership	falls	to	a	particular	house	becomes	established.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	A	ting	with	legs	upturned.
Furthers	removal	of	stagnating	stuff.
One	takes	a	concubine	for	the	sake	of	her	son.
No	blame.
b)	“A	ting	with	legs	upturned.”	This	is	still	not	wrong.
“Furthers	removal	of	stagnating	stuff,”	in	order	to	be	able	to	follow	the	man	of	worth.

The	line	at	the	bottom	means	the	legs	of	the	ting.2	Since	the	line	is	weak	and	stands	at	the	beginning,



the	implication	arises	that	before	cooking	one	must	turn	the	ting	upside	down	to	throw	out	the	old	food
remnants.	The	line	has	a	connection	by	position	with	the	central	and	strong	line	next	to	it;	hence	the	idea
of	a	concubine	(weak	and	subordinated).

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	There	is	food	in	the	ting.
My	comrades	are	envious,
But	they	cannot	harm	me.
Good	fortune.
b)	“There	is	food	in	the	ting.”	Be	cautious	about	where	you	go.
“My	comrades	are	envious.”	This	brings	no	blame	in	the	end.

This	line	is	firm	and	central,	hence	it	symbolizes	the	contents	of	the	ting.	It	forms	a	unit	with	the	third
and	 fourth	 lines,	but	as	 it	 stands	 in	 the	relationship	of	correspondence	 to	 the	ruler	of	 the	hexagram,	 it
must	go	its	own	ways	as	prescribed	for	it	by	these	relationships.	This	leads	on	the	other	hand	to	envy	from
its	 comrades,	 the	 two	 lines	 from	which	 it	 is	 separated	 by	 inner	 relationships.	 But	 being	 quite	 free	 of
possible	entanglements	and	shielded	by	the	strong	relationship	to	the	ruler,	it	need	fear	nothing.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	handle	of	the	ting	is	altered.
One	is	impeded	in	his	way	of	life.
The	fat	of	the	pheasant	is	not	eaten.
Once	rain	falls,	remorse	is	spent.
Good	fortune	comes	in	the	end.
b)	“The	handle	of	the	ting	is	altered.”	He	has	missed	the	idea.

This	line	is	the	lowest	in	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Tui,	whose	top	line	means	mouth.	It	might	therefore
be	assumed	that	the,	contents,	indicated	by	the	upper	trigram	Li,	which	means	pheasant,	are	eaten,	but
this	is	not	the	case.	The	vessel	is	not	portable,	because	the	handle	has	been	altered.	This	is	suggested	by
the	fact	that	the	present	line,	which	ordinarily	would	be	related	to	the	top	line,	representing	the	carrying
rings,	is	itself	firm	[not	hollow]	and	therefore	cannot	receive	the	carrying	rings	(cf.	on	the	other	hand	the
six	 in	 the	 fifth	place).	There	 is	a	promise	 for	 the	 future.	As	 the	 line	changes,	K’an,	meaning	rain,	 takes
shape	as	the	lower	primary	trigram	and	upper	nuclear	trigram.	The	situation	is	made	easier	by	this.	The
stoppage	ceases,	and	the	movement	leads	to	the	goal.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	legs	of	the	ting	are	broken.
The	prince’s	meal	is	spilled
And	his	person	is	soiled.
Misfortune.
b)	“The	prince’s	meal	is	spilled.”	How	can	one	still	trust	him?

This	line	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	six	at	the	beginning,	the	line	suggesting
the	upturned	 legs	of	a	 ting.	The	 latter	situation	 is	not	of	grave	 import,	 for	 the	 ting	 is	 still	 empty;	here,
however,	the	matter	is	serious,	since	the	ting	contains	food.	It	is	therefore	not	simply	an	overturning:	the
legs	of	the	ting	are	broken,	and	the	prince’s	meal	is	spilled.	In	conformity	with	the	place,	there	should	be
a	relationship	with	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place,	either	that	of	holding	together	or
that	of	receiving.	But	the	relationship	with	the	six	at	the	beginning	interferes.	This	points	to	a	disastrous
split	 between	 character	 and	 position,	 between	 knowledge	 and	 aspirations,	 between	 strength	 and
responsibility.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	ting	has	yellow	handles,	golden	carrying	rings.
Perseverance	furthers.
b)	The	yellow	handles	of	the	ting	are	central,	in	order	to	receive	what	is	real.

This	line	is	centrally	placed	in	the	upper	trigram	Li;	it	is	moreover	the	middle	line	of	the	trigram	K’un,
which	 is	 associated	 with	 the	 color	 yellow.	 The	 carrying	 rings	 are	 of	 metal	 because	 the	 upper	 nuclear
trigram	 Tui	 means	 metal.	 The	 carrying	 rings	 (which	 in	 ancient	 Chinese	 vessels	 are	 usually	 linked
together)	are	no	doubt	represented	by	the	strong	line	at	the	top.	This	line	is	in	contrast	with	the	nine	in
the	third	place:	the	handle	is	hollow	and	can	therefore	receive	the	“real”	(i.e.,	 firm)	carrying	rings,	and
the	vessel	can	be	carried.
In	the	language	of	symbols	this	means	a	great	deal.	The	line	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	and	has	over

it	a	sage	(the	nine	at	the	top),	with	whom	it	is	connected	by	position	and	complementary	relationship.	The
ruler	 is	 “hollow”	 [receptive],	 hence	 capable	 of	 receiving	 the	 power,	 that	 is,	 the	 teachings	 of	 this	 sage
(“handle,”	erh,	is	represented	by	the	same	character	as	“ear”).	Thereby	he	makes	progress.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	ting	has	rings	of	jade.
Great	good	fortune.
Nothing	that	would	not	act	to	further.
b)	The	jade	rings	in	the	highest	place	show	the	firm	and	the	yielding	complementing	each	other

properly.



This	 situation	 is	 the	 same	 as	 that	 of	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 except	 that	 here	 it	 is	 seen	 from	 the
standpoint	of	 the	sage	who	bestows.	What	appears	 in	the	six	 in	 the	 fifth	place	as	the	 firmness	of	metal
manifests	itself	here	as	the	soft	sheen	of	jade.	It	 is	possible	for	the	sage	to	impart	his	teaching	because
the	six	in	the	fifth	place	meets	him	halfway	with	the	proper	receptivity.



51.	Chên	/	The	Arousing	(Shock,	Thunder)

The	 rulers	 of	 the	 hexagram	 Chên	 are	 the	 two	 light	 lines.	 But	 since	 it	 is	 implicit	 in	 the	 idea	 of	 the
hexagram	of	SHOCK	that	the	light	element	is	moving	upward	from	below,	the	fourth	line	is	not	regarded
as	a	ruler,	and	only	the	line	at	the	beginning	is	so	considered.

The	Sequence
Among	the	custodians	of	the	sacred	vessels,	the	eldest	son	stands	first.	Hence	there	follows	the

hexagram	of	THE	AROUSING.	The	Arousing	means	movement.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	AROUSING	means	beginning,	arising.

This	hexagram	is	one	of	the	eight	in	which	a	primary	trigram	is	doubled.	It	is	formed	by	doubling	of	the
trigram	Chên,	which	symbolizes	the	eldest	son,	the	beginning	of	things	in	the	east—the	spring.	This	is	also
suggested	by	the	Image,	which	shows	the	upward	movement	of	electricity,	 thunder,	making	 itself	heard
again	in	the	spring.

THE	JUDGMENT
SHOCK	brings	success.
Shock	comes—oh,	oh!
Laughing	words—ha,	ha!
The	shock	terrifies	for	a	hundred	miles,
And	he	does	not	let	fall	the	sacrificial	spoon	and	chalice.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“SHOCK	brings	success.	Shock	comes—oh,	oh!”	Fear	brings	good	fortune.
“Laughing	words—ha,	ha!”	Afterward	one	has	a	rule.
“The	 shock	 terrifies	 for	 a	 hundred	miles.”	 If	 one	 causes	 fear	 far	 and	wide	 and	has	 concern	 for

what	is	near	by,	one	may	come	forth	and	protect	the	temple	of	the	ancestors	and	the	altar	of	the	earth,
and	be	the	leader	of	the	sacrifice.

“Shock	comes—oh,	oh”:	the	exclamatory	words	mean	first	a	frightened	tiger,	then	a	lizard	running	in
fright	hither	and	thither	on	the	wall.	Thus	the	meaning	of	fear	became	attached	to	the	two	onomatopoeic
characters.	The	fear	thus	aroused	makes	one	cautious,	and	caution	brings	good	fortune.	“Laughing	words
—ha,	ha”:	the	words	are	suggested	by	the	sound	of	thunder,	which	sounds	like	“ha,	ha.”	They	are	a	symbol
of	inner	calm	in	the	midst	of	the	storm	of	outer	movement.

“The	shock	terrifies	for	a	hundred	miles”:	this	is	the	sound	of	thunder,	which	is	at	the	same	time
the	symbol	of	a	mighty	ruler	(suggested	by	the	idea	of	the	eldest	son)	who	knows	how	to	make	himself
respected	 by	 all	 those	 about	 him,	 yet	 is	 careful	 and	 exact	 in	 the	 smallest	 detail.	 The	 concluding
sentence	also	refers	to	this.	The	lord	of	the	sacrifices	is	at	the	same	time	the	lord	of	the	house	or	of
the	realm.	In	this	regard	also	the	eldest	son	had	his	special	task.	The	trigram	Chên	means	the	coming
forth	of	God	in	the	spring	and	also	the	reawakening	of	the	life	force,	which	stirs	again	from	below.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	repeated:	the	image	of	SHOCK.
Thus	in	fear	and	trembling
The	superior	man	sets	his	life	in	order
And	examines	himself.

The	phrase	is	“thunder	repeated”	because	the	trigram	Chên	is	doubled.	The	first	thunder	denotes	fear
and	trembling,	the	second	denotes	shaping	and	exploring.

THE	LINES

Nine	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	Shock	comes—oh,	oh!
Then	follow	laughing	words—ha,	ha!
Good	fortune.
b)	“Shock	comes—oh,	oh!”	Fear	brings	good	fortune.
“Laughing	words—ha,	ha!”	Afterward	one	has	a	rule.

A	part	of	the	Judgment,	and	of	the	commentary	on	it,	 is	given	here	word	for	word,	as	is	occasionally
done	in	the	case	of	the	ruler	of	a	hexagram.	The	strong	line	at	the	beginning	initiating	the	movement	from
below	shows	the	quintessence	of	the	whole	situation.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Shock	comes	bringing	danger.
A	hundred	thousand	times
You	lose	your	treasures
And	must	climb	the	nine	hills.
Do	not	go	in	pursuit	of	them.
After	seven	days	you	will	get	them	back	again.
b)	“Shock	comes	bringing	danger.”	It	rests	upon	a	firm	line.



Since	the	first	 line	presses	upward	with	powerful	shock,	there	can	be	no	thought	of	a	relationship	of
holding	together	between	it	and	this	weak	line	in	a	weak	place.	But	the	line	is	central	and	correct,	and	is
therefore	 affected	 only	 externally	 by	 the	 threatening	 danger,	 just	 as	 a	 thunderstorm	 causes	 only
momentary	shock.	Danger	is	indicated	by	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	under	which	the	line	stands.	Flight	to
the	hills	is	suggested	by	the	lower	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain.	Seven	is	the	number	indicating	return,
which	restores	the	old	conditions	after	the	situations	of	all	of	the	six	lines	have	changed.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Shock	comes	and	makes	one	distraught.
If	shock	spurs	to	action
One	remains	free	of	misfortune.
b)	“Shock	comes	and	makes	one	distraught.”	The	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.

The	word	su,	here	rendered	by	“distraught,”	denotes	 literally	 the	reviving	movements	of	 insects	still
numb	and	stiff	after	their	winter	sleep.	The	place	is	not	the	proper	one,	for	the	place	is	strong	and	the	line
weak;	therefore	it	is	not	equal	to	the	shock	of	the	position.	Hence	it	must	allow	itself	to	be	set	in	motion
by	the	shock.	Through	movement	a	weak	line	becomes	a	strong	line.	Thus	one	becomes	equal	to	shock.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Shock	is	mired.
b)	“Shock	is	mired.”	It	is	not	yet	brilliant	enough.

The	line	itself	is	strong,	but	its	strength	is	impaired	by	the	weakness	of	the	place.	Furthermore,	it	is	in
the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	just	where	the	pit	lies,	and	also	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	Keeping
Still.	 Thus	 the	 strong	 nature	 of	 the	 line	 cannot	 become	 effectual;	 it	 does	 not	 show	 enough	 brilliance,
hence	is	caught	fast	in	the	mire.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Shock	goes	hither	and	thither.
Danger.
However,	nothing	at	all	is	lost.
Yet	there	are	things	to	be	done.
b)	“Shock	goes	hither	and	thither.	Danger.”	One	walks	in	danger.
The	“things	to	be	done”	are	in	the	middle,	hence	nothing	at	all	is	lost.

The	 line	 is	 central,	 like	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place.	 But	 while	 in	 the	 latter	 case	 danger	 threatens
(nuclear	trigram	K’an),	here	 it	has	been	overcome	and	one	 is	already	on	the	hill	 (nuclear	trigram	Kên).
Hence	 one	 loses	 nothing.	 The	 point	 is	 to	 hold	 firmly	 to	 the	 central	 position	 and	 thus	 to	 conserve	 for
oneself	the	strength	inherent	in	it—the	fifth	place	being	the	place	of	the	ruler.	The	six	in	the	second	place
is	the	official.	An	official	may	lose	his	property	temporarily,	but	all	of	it	can	be	replaced.	The	six	in	the	fifth
place,	however,	is	the	ruler;	and	his	possessions	consist	of	land	and	people.	These	must	not	be	lost.	Such
loss	can	be	prevented	if	one	maintains	a	central	position	and	behaves	correctly.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Shock	brings	ruin	and	terrified	gazing	around.
Going	ahead	brings	misfortune.
If	it	has	not	yet	touched	one’s	own	body
But	has	reached	one’s	neighbor	first,
There	is	no	blame.
One’s	comrades	have	something	to	talk	about.
b)	“Shock	brings	ruin.”	He	has	not	attained	the	middle.
Misfortune,	but	no	blame.	One	is	warned	by	the	fear	for	one’s	neighbor.

This	 line	 is	related	to	the	third,	which	is	the	comrade	who	has	something	to	say.	The	fifth	 line	 is	the
neighbor.	Here	a	weak	line	stands	at	the	climax	of	shock	and	is	therefore	inherently	not	equal	to	it.	The
shock	 threatens	 ruin	 as	 in	 an	 earthquake,	 hence	 the	 terrified	 gazing	 around.	 Trying	 to	 undertake
something	under	such	conditions	would	lead	to	misfortune.	But	if	one	takes	warning	from	the	experience
of	one’s	neighbor—in	this	case	the	fifth	line—and	remains	calm,	mistakes	are	avoided.	The	third	line,	the
comrade,	 is	 forced	 by	 the	 situation	 to	 move,	 hence	 cannot	 understand	 why	 the	 sixth	 line	 stays	 calm.
However,	the	difference	in	behavior	is	the	result	of	the	difference	in	place.	Therefore	one	must	be	wholly
independent	in	one’s	actions.



52.	Kên	/	Keeping	Still,	Mountain

Here	also,	strictly	speaking,	the	two	light	lines	are	the	rulers	of	the	hexagram.	But	since	the	meaning
of	the	hexagram	of	KEEPING	STILL	is	based	on	the	fact	that	the	light	element	stands	still,	the	third	line
does	not	count	as	a	ruler,	and	only	the	line	at	the	top	is	so	regarded.

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	move	continuously,	one	must	make	them	stop.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of

KEEPING	STILL.	Keeping	Still	means	stopping.
Miscellaneous	Notes
KEEPING	STILL	means	stopping.

This	hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	of	 the	preceding	one.	 It	 is	 formed	by	doubling	of	 the	 trigram	Kên,	 the
youngest	son,	the	mountain.	The	place	of	Kên	is	in	the	northeast,	between	K’an	in	the	north	and	Chên	in
the	east.	It	is	the	mysterious	place	where	all	things	begin	and	end,	where	death	and	birth	pass	one	into
the	other.	The	attribute	of	the	hexagram	is	keeping	still,	because	the	strong	lines,	whose	trend	is	upward,
have	attained	their	goal.

THE	JUDGMENT
KEEPING	STILL.	Keeping	his	back	still
So	that	he	no	longer	feels	his	body.
He	goes	into	his	courtyard
And	does	not	see	his	people.
No	blame.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
KEEPING	STILL	means	stopping.
When	it	is	time	to	stop,	then	stop.
When	it	is	time	to	advance,	then	advance.
Thus	movement	and	rest	do	not	miss	the	right	time,
And	their	course	becomes	bright	and	clear.
Keeping	 his	 stopping	 still1	 means	 stopping	 in	 his	 place.	 Those	 above	 and	 those	 below	 are	 in

opposition	and	have	nothing	in	common.	Therefore	it	is	said:	“He	does	not	feel	his	body.	He	goes	into
his	courtyard	and	does	not	see	his	people.	No	blame.”
The	 nature	 of	 the	 hexagram	 predicates	 a	 separation	 of	 the	 upper	 and	 the	 lower	 trigram.	 This	 is

indicated	also	by	the	divergent	movements	of	the	nuclear	trigrams,	the	upper	going	upward	and	the	lower
downward.	Keeping	still	 is	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram	itself,	movement	is	the	meaning	of	the	nuclear
trigrams.	Therefore	it	is	explained	that	movement	and	stopping,	each	at	the	right	time,	are	both	features
of	 rest:	 the	 one	 is	 continuance	 in	 a	 state	 of	 movement,	 the	 other	 continuance	 in	 a	 state	 of	 rest.	 The
hexagram	Kên	has	an	inner	brilliance,	because	the	light	line	at	the	top	is	above	the	two	dark	ones	and	so
is	not	darkened;	hence	the	saying:	“Their	course	becomes	bright	and	clear.”

The	back	is	that	part	of	the	body	which	is	invisible	to	oneself;	keeping	the	back	still	symbolizes	making
the	self	still.	The	lower	primary	trigram	indicates	this	keeping	still	of	the	back,	so	that	one	is	no	longer
aware	 of	 one’s	 body,	 that	 is,	 of	 one’s	 personality.	 The	 upper	 primary	 trigram	 means	 courtyard.	 The
individual	 lines	 of	 the	 upper	 trigram	have	 no	 relation	 to	 the	 corresponding	 lines	 of	 the	 lower	 trigram,
hence	the	upper	and	the	lower	trigram	turn	their	backs	on	each	other,	as	it	were.	Hence	one	does	not	see
the	other	persons	in	the	courtyard.

THE	IMAGE
Mountains	standing	close	together:
The	image	of	KEEPING	STILL.
Thus	the	superior	man
Does	not	permit	his	thoughts
To	go	beyond	his	situation.

The	 corresponding	 lines	 of	 the	 upper	 and	 the	 lower	 trigram	 do	 not	 stand	 in	 the	 relationship	 of
correspondence	 in	any	of	 the	hexagrams	 formed	by	doubling	of	a	 trigram.	But	only	 in	 the	hexagram	of
KEEPING	STILL	is	it	expressly	noted	that	the	mountains	have	merely	an	outward	connection;	in	the	case
of	 the	 other	 hexagrams	 so	 formed,	 a	 reciprocal	movement	 [of	 the	 trigrams]	 is	 always	 presupposed.	 In
KEEPING	STILL	the	opposite	of	movement	and	interchange	is	represented.	Accordingly,	the	lesson	taught
by	the	Image	is	that	of	restriction	to	what	is	within	the	limits	of	one’s	position.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Keeping	his	toes	still.
No	blame.
Continued	perseverance	furthers.
b)	“Keeping	his	toes	still”:	what	is	right	is	not	yet	lost.

With	respect	to	their	images,	the	individual	lines	in	this	hexagram	are	reminiscent	of	the	lines	of	Hsien,
INFLUENCE	(31).	Thus	the	lowest	line	is	again	the	symbol	of	the	toes.	The	line	is	weak,	therefore	keeping



still	accords	with	the	time	and	is	not	a	mistake.	It	is	important	only	that	a	weak	nature	of	this	sort	should
not	become	impatient	but	should	possess	enough	perseverance	to	keep	still.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Keeping	his	calves	still.
He	cannot	rescue	him	whom	he	follows.
His	heart	is	not	glad.
b)	“He	cannot	rescue	him	whom	he	follows.”	Because	this	one	does	not	turn	toward	him	to	listen

to	him.
The	 line	 that	 is	 followed	by	 the	six	 in	 the	second	place	 is	 the	nine	 in	 the	 third	place.	The	six	 in	 the

second	place	is	correct	and	central	and	would	like	to	save	not	only	itself	but	also	the	one	it	follows.	But
the	nine	in	the	third	place	is	a	strong	line	in	the	place	of	transition,	and	it	is	the	lowest	line	of	the	nuclear
trigram	Chên,	the	Arousing;	hence	it	 is	extremely	restless.	At	the	same	time	it	 is	 in	the	nuclear	trigram
K’an,	the	Abysmal,	which	means	earache,	hence	the	failure	to	hear.	K’an	is	also	the	symbol	of	the	heart;
hence,	“His	heart	is	not	glad.”

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Keeping	his	hips	still.
Making	his	sacrum	stiff.
Dangerous.	The	heart	suffocates.
b)	“Keeping	his	hips	still.”	There	is	danger	that	the	heart	may	suffocate.

This	line	is	in	the	middle	of	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	hence	the	allusion	to	the	heart.	At	the	same	time
it	is	the	one	light	line	between	dark	lines,	and	this	indicates	danger	and	confinement.	Keeping	still	in	this
situation	 is	 dangerous.	 When	 the	 back	 is	 kept	 still	 one	 gains	 control	 over	 the	 whole	 body.	 The	 hips,
however,	 form	the	boundary	between	the	movements	of	 the	 light	and	the	dark	 forces.	 If	 rigidity	occurs
here,	the	heart	will	move	aimlessly,	the	nerve	paths	will	thereby	be	interrupted,	and	a	suffocation	of	the
heart	is	to	be	feared.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Keeping	his	trunk	still.
No	blame.
b)	“Keeping	his	trunk	still.”	He	stops	within	his	own	body.

The	fourth	place	is	the	trunk.	It	is	very	weak,	and	a	weak	line	stands	over	it.	In	the	time	of	KEEPING
STILL	it	is	altogether	correct	if	one	knows	how	to	restrain	oneself	at	the	right	time.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Keeping	his	jaws	still.
The	words	have	order.
Remorse	disappears.
b)	“Keeping	his	jaws	still,”	as	a	result	of	central	and	correct	behavior.

While	in	INFLUENCE	(31)	the	image	of	the	jaws	does	not	appear	until	the	topmost	place	is	reached,	it
comes	in	the	fifth	place	here,	because	in	this	hexagram	the	ruler	occupies	the	sixth	place.

The	 present	 line	 is	 in	 a	 central	 place	 and	 also	 correct.	 But	 since	 it	 belongs	 simultaneously	 to	 the
trigram	 Kên,	 Keeping	 Still,	 and	 to	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Chên,	 movement,	 it	 suggests	 the	 possibility	 of
movement	of	the	jaws	and	of	speaking	like	thunder.	But	this	is	avoided	through	the	central	behavior	of	the
line	and	the	fact	that	it	belongs	to	the	upper	trigram,	Keeping	Still.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Noblehearted	keeping	still.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	noblehearted	keeping	still	comes	from	the	fact	that	there	is	an	ample	end.

This	line	ending	the	hexagram	is	strong,	hence	it	is	thought	of	as	ample.	The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is
at	 the	 top	of	 the	mountain,	 in	 the	place	where	 the	 layers	of	earth	are	most	amply	 (most	densely)	piled
upon	one	another.	As	the	highest	line	it	has	light	intrinsically;	this	can	be	fully	effectual	precisely	because
of	the	calm	keeping	still	of	the	line.	Hence	good	fortune	is	attained	here.	Since	this	strong	line	does	not
strive	further	upward	but	stays	quietly	in	its	place,	it	is,	 in	contrast	to	other	strong	lines	at	the	top,	not
unfavorable.



53.	Chien	/	Development	(Gradual	Progress)

The	basic	idea	of	the	hexagram	of	DEVELOPMENT	is	the	marriage	of	a	girl.	Only	the	six	in	the	second
place	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	nine	in	the	fifth.	It	represents	the	girl	who	is	to
be	married.	Hence	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place	 is	 a	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram.	However,	 development	 also
connotes	progress,	and	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	has	progressed,	occupies	a	high	position,	and	has	a	firm
and	central	character;	hence	it	also	is	a	ruler	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	stop	 forever;	hence	 there	 follows	 the	hexagram	of	DEVELOPMENT.	Development

means	to	progress.
Miscellaneous	Notes
DEVELOPMENT	shows	how	the	maiden	is	given	in	marriage	and	in	this	must	await	the	actions	of

the	man.
Like	 the	 hexagrams	 Chin,	 PROGRESS	 (35),	 and	 Shêng,	 PUSHING	 UPWARD	 (46),	 this	 hexagram

pictures	progress.	But	while	PROGRESS	is	like	the	rising	sun	spreading	light	over	the	earth,	and	Shêng
shows	a	tree	pushing	up	through	the	earth,	what	is	meant	here	is	slow	growth	such	as	that	of	a	tree	on	a
mountainside.	 In	 another	 aspect	 the	 hexagram	 is	 one	 of	 those	 dealing	 with	 the	 relation	 of	 man	 and
woman,	 and	 therefore	most	 closely	 related	 to	 the	 hexagram	Hsien,	 INFLUENCE	 (31).	 In	 the	 latter	 the
youngest	daughter	is	being	influenced	by	the	youngest	son.	The	effect	is	quick	and	mutual,	expressing	the
natural	 attraction	 between	 the	 sexes.	 In	 the	 present	 hexagram,	 the	 mature	 elder	 daughter	 is	 being
influenced	by	 the	 youngest	 son;	 hence	 in	 this	 instance	 the	 emphasis	 is	 rather	 on	 the	mores	with	 their
restraining	effect.	Thus	we	are	reminded	here	of	the	gradual	development	in	the	case	of	marriage,	which
in	the	course	of	time	came	to	require	the	carrying	out	of	six	different	rites	(cf.	the	next	hexagram).

THE	JUDGMENT
DEVELOPMENT.	The	maiden
Is	given	in	marriage.
Good	fortune.
Perseverance	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
The	progress	of	DEVELOPMENT	means	the	good	fortune	of	the	maiden’s	marriage.
Progressing	and	thereby	attaining	the	right	place:	going	brings	success.
Progressing	in	what	is	right-thus	one	may	set	the	country	in	order.
His	place	 is	 firm,	and	he	has	attained	 the	middle.	Keeping	still	and	penetrating:	 this	makes	 the

movement	inexhaustible.
The	meaning	of	the	name	of	the	hexagram	is	explained	in	terms	of	the	first	part	of	the	Judgment,	the

rest	of	which	is	elucidated	on	the	basis	of	the	structure	of	the	hexagram.	The	two	rulers	of	the	hexagram,
the	second	and	 the	 fifth	 line,	 show	a	progressing	and	 therefore	attain	 their	correct	and	natural	places.
Attainment	 of	 a	 proper	 place	 bespeaks	 a	 correct	 attitude	 of	 mind;	 there	 by	 undertakings	 meet	 with
success,	and	 the	state	can	be	set	 in	order.	The	emphasis	here	 is	on	 the	combination	of	personal	moral
effort	and	such	strength	as	is	required	to	set	the	state	in	order.	The	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	standing	in	the
fifth	place—that	of	command—combining	strength	and	central	correctness,	is	especially	well	qualified	for
achieving	successful	 results	of	 this	kind.	The	 latter	part	of	 the	commentary	deals	with	 the	 two	primary
trigrams	and	points	out	that	the	inexhaustible	source	of	progress	is	inner	calm	combined	with	adaptability
to	circumstances.	Calm	is	the	attribute	of	the	inner	trigram,	Kên,	adaptability	that	of	the	outer	trigram,
Sun.

THE	IMAGE
On	the	mountain,	a	tree:
The	image	of	DEVELOPMENT.
Thus	the	superior	man	abides	in	dignity	and	virtue,
In	order	to	improve	the	mores.

The	tree	on	the	mountain	grows	larger	slowly	and	imperceptibly.	It	spreads	and	gives	shade,	and	thus
through	 its	 nature	 influences	 its	 surroundings.	 Thus	 it	 is	 an	 example	 of	 the	 active	 power	 by	which	 an
individual	 improves	 the	 mores	 of	 his	 environment	 through	 consistent	 cultivation	 of	 his	 own	 moral
qualities.	The	tree	on	the	mountain,	like	the	tree	on	the	earth	in	Kuan,	VIEW	(20),	represents	influence	by
example.	The	keeping	still	of	the	mountain	is	a	symbol	for	abiding	in	dignity	and	virtue.	The	penetrating
attribute	of	wood	(or	wind)	is	a	symbol	of	the	positive	influence	emanating	from	a	good	example.

THE	LINES
The	hexagram	as	a	whole	refers	to	the	contracting	of	marriage,	and	consequently	the	image	common

to	all	the	lines	is	the	wild	goose,	symbol	of	conjugal	fidelity.
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	shore.
The	young	son	is	in	danger.



There	is	talk.	No	blame.
b)	The	danger	besetting	the	little	son	implies	no	blame.

The	nuclear	trigram	Li	means	a	flying	bird,	hence	the	image	of	a	wild	goose.	The	first	line	stands	next
to	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 K’an,	 the	 Abysmal,	 hence	 the	 shore	 as	 an	 image.	 Kên,	 the	 lower	 trigram,
symbolizes	the	youngest	son.	It	contains	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	danger.	The	“talk”	comes	perhaps	from
the	upper	trigram	Sun,	wind,	which	soughs	and	resounds.
This	 is	 a	 yielding	 line	 in	 a	 lowly1	 place.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 not	 impetuous	 in	 pressing	 forward;	 it	 is

conscious	of	the	danger.	Hence,	though	others	talk	about	it,	it	remains	blameless.
Six	in	the	second	place:

	
a)	The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	cliff.
Eating	and	drinking	in	peace	and	concord.
Good	fortune.
b)	“Eating	and	drinking	in	peace	and	concord”:	he	does	not	merely	eat	his	fill.

Kên	is	the	mountain,	hence	the	image	of	a	cliff.	The	nuclear	trigram	K’an	indicates	eating	and	drinking.
When	the	wild	goose	finds	food,	it	calls	its	comrades.	This	line	is	yielding	and	related	to	the	nine	in	the
fifth	place,	which	it	calls.	It	does	not	eat	to	satisfy	itself	alone	but	takes	thought	at	once	of	others	as	well.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	plateau.
The	man	goes	forth	and	does	not	return.
The	woman	carries	a	child	but	does	not	bring	it	forth.
Misfortune.
It	furthers	one	to	fight	off	robbers.
b)	“The	man	goes	forth	and	does	not	return.”	He	leaves	the	group	of	his	companions.
“The	woman	carries	a	child	but	does	not	bring	it	forth.”	She	has	lost	the	right	way.
“It	furthers	one	to	fight	off	robbers.”	Devotion	and	mutual	protection.

This	 line,	as	the	uppermost	one	 in	the	trigram	Kên,	 indicates	a	high	place,	hence	the	plateau.	It	 is	a
strong	line	in	a	strong	place,	hence	not	moderate	in	movement.	It	pictures	a	man	who	never	desists	from
his	 course	 and	who	 therefore	 proceeds	without	 ever	 turning	 back.	 It	 stands	 in	 relationship	 to	 the	 two
strong	lines	at	the	top,	but	there	is	no	correspondence.	Further,	it	is	in	the	middle	of	the	nuclear	trigram
of	danger	and	is	therefore	separated	from	its	own	kind	(a	dark	line	above,	another	below	it).	Since	the	line
does	not	return,	the	trigram	K’un,	forming	below	as	a	result	of	its	departure,	is	left	behind	without	a	child.
Thus	the	woman	has	lost	her	way.	Only	in	so	far	as	this	strong	line	protects	the	two	weak	ones	under	it
from	robbers,	does	it	have	any	furthering	quality.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	tree.
Perhaps	it	will	find	a	flat	branch.	No	blame.
b)	“Perhaps	it	will	find	a	flat	branch.”	It	is	devoted	and	gentle.

This	 line	has	 entered	 the	upper	 trigram	Sun,	wood,	 hence	 the	 image	of	 its	 gradually	 approaching	a
tree.	The	 tree	 itself	 affords	no	 foothold	 for	 the	wild	goose,	whose	 feet	 are	not	made	 for	 clutching;	 but
through	adaptability	and	devotion	 it	may	 find	a	 flat	branch.	This	 is	a	weak	 line	 in	a	weak	place,	hence
correct.	It	is	therefore	adaptable	and	cautious,	and	thus	temporarily	finds	a	resting	place.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	summit.
For	three	years	the	woman	has	no	child.
In	the	end	nothing	can	hinder	her.
Good	fortune.
b)	In	the	end	nothing	can	hinder	good	fortune.	One	attains	one’s	wish.

This	line	is	the	upper	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	hence	it	is	the	summit	to	which	the	wild	goose	draws	near.
It	 stands	 in	 relationship	 to	 the	 lower	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place;	 the
correspondence	between	the	two	places	is	analogous	to	the	relation	of	husband	and	wife.	Hence	the	idea
that	 union	 finally	 takes	 place.	 But	 this	 takes	 three	 years,	 for	 the	 line	 is	 separated	 from	 the	 six	 in	 the
second	place	by	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	danger.	However,	the	union	is	based	on	natural	affinity;	hence	it
can	be	delayed	but	not	permanently	prevented.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	wild	goose	gradually	draws	near	the	cloud	heights.
Its	feathers	can	be	used	for	the	sacred	dance.
Good	fortune.
b)	“Its	feathers	can	be	used	for	the	sacred	dance.	Good	fortune.”	He	is	not	to	be	disconcerted.

The	place	at	the	top	is	the	region	of	the	clouds,	and	here	the	character	lu,	really	meaning	a	plateau	(cf.
the	nine	in	the	third	place)	has	mistakenly	been	written	in	place	of	another	character	meaning	“highest
heights.”
The	trigram	Sun	means	wind.	This	suggests	flight	through	the	clouds.	The	line	 is	strong	and	already

outside	 the	 affairs	 of	 the	 world.	 It	 is	 regarded	 by	 the	 others	 solely	 as	 an	 example	 and	 thus	 exerts	 a
beneficent	influence.	It	no	longer	enters	into	the	confusion	of	mundane	affairs.



The	dances	mentioned	were	sacred	pantomimes	in	which	feathers	of	a	special	sort	were	used.	The	idea
inhering	 in	 this	 line	 recalls	 that	 of	 the	 top	 line	 of	 Kuan,	 VIEW	 (20).	 In	 the	 latter	 too	 the	 line	 as	 such
“stands	outside	the	affairs	of	the	world,	taking	part	only	as	a	spectator.



54.	Kuei	Mei	/	The	Marrying	Maiden

The	hexagram	of	THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN	is	based	on	the	idea	that	the	girl	is	marrying	on	her	own
initiative.	 Her	 character	 is	 not	 good,	 therefore	 the	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision	 says:	 “	 ‘Nothing	 that
would	further.’	The	yielding	rests	upon	the	hard.”	This	refers	to	the	six	in	the	third	place	and	to	the	six	at
the	 top,	which	are	 thus	 the	constituting	rulers	of	 the	hexagram.	The	six	 in	 the	 fifth	place,	on	 the	other
hand,	is	in	the	place	of	honor	and	associates	with	those	below;	thus	it	changes	what	is	not	good	into	good
and	 transforms	misfortune	 into	good	 fortune.	Because	of	 this	 the	six	 in	 the	 fifth	place	 is	 the	governing
ruler	of	the	hexagram.

The	Sequence
Through	 progress	 one	 is	 sure	 to	 reach	 the	 place	 where	 one	 belongs.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the

hexagram	of	THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN.1
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN	shows	the	end	of	maidenhood.

This	hexagram	is	judged	in	very	different	ways.	In	later	times	it	was	considered	immoral	for	a	girl	to
marry	on	her	own	initiative.	The	mores	demanded	that	the	girl	wait	for	the	man	to	take	the	lead,	as	set
forth	in	the	preceding	hexagram.	This	goes	back	to	patriarchal	times.	But	the	present	hexagram	has	also
so	 to	 speak	 a	 cosmic	 meaning.	 For,	 according	 to	 the	 arrangement	 of	 the	 eight	 trigrams	 by	 King	 Wên
[Inner-World	 Arrangements2],	 the	 upper	 trigram	 Chên	 belongs	 in	 the	 east	 and	 denotes	 spring,	 the
beginning	of	life;	the	lower	trigram	Tui	belongs	in	the	west	and	denotes	autumn,	the	end	of	life,	and	the
two	 nuclear	 trigrams	 K’an	 and	 Li	 represent	 the	 north	 (winter)	 and	 the	 south	 (summer)	 respectively.
Consequently	the	whole	cycle	of	life	is	contained	in	this	hexagram.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN.
Undertakings	bring	misfortune.
Nothing	that	would	further.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN	describes	the	great	meaning	of	heaven	and	earth.	If	heaven	and	earth

do	not	unite,	all	creatures	fail	to	prosper.
THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN	means	the	end	and	beginning	of	humanity.
Joyousness	in	movement:	she	who	marries	is	the	young	girl.
“Undertakings	bring	misfortune.”	The	places	are	not	the	appropriate	ones.
“Nothing	that	would	further.”	The	yielding	rests	upon	the	hard.

In	the	sequence	of	the	trigrams	in	the	Primal	Arrangement,3	which	corresponds	with	the	world	of	the
idea,	Ch’ien	is	in	the	south	and	K’un	in	the	north;	Li	is	in	the	east	as	the	sun	and	K’an	in	the	west	as	the
moon.	 In	 the	 Inner-World	 Arrangement,	 which	 corresponds	 with	 the	 phenomenal	 world,	 the	 action	 is
transferred	to	the	four	trigrams	Chên	(east),	Li	(south),	Tui	(west),	and	K’an	(north).	Sun	and	moon	here
take	the	place	of	heaven	and	earth	as	active	forces.	Heaven,	Ch’ien,	has	withdrawn	to	the	northwest,	and
the	eldest	son,	Chên,	in	the	east,	is	the	originator	of	life.	The	earth,	K’un,	has	withdrawn	to	the	southwest,
and	the	youngest	daughter,	Tui,	in	the	west,	presides	over	harvest	and	birth.	Thus	the	present	hexagram
indicates	the	cosmic	order	of	the	relations	of	the	sexes	and	the	cycle	of	life.

The	interpretation	given	by	Liu	Yüan4	in	the	Chou	I	Hêng	Chieh	is	significant.	He	sees	in	the	hexagram
not	 the	 maiden	 (Tui)	 following	 an	 older	 man	 (Chên),	 but	 the	 elder	 brother	 (Chên)	 leading	 his	 younger
sister	to	her	husband.	A	certain	basis	for	this	view	is	afforded	by	the	words	accompanying	the	fifth	line.
We	 are	 dealing	 here	 with	 reminiscences	 of	 matriarchal	 times	 disseminated	 in	 popular	 romance	 by	 the
story	of	how	Chung	K’uei	gave	his	sister	in	marriage.

THE	 MARRYING	 MAIDEN	 means	 the	 beginning	 and	 end	 of	 humanity,	 as	 Chên	 in	 the	 east	 means
spring,	ascent,	and	Tui	in	the	west	means	autumn,	decline.	The	commentary	then	explains	the	name	of	the
hexagram	 by	 citing	 the	 attributes	 of	 the	 two	 trigrams—Tui,	 joyousness,	 and	 Chên,	 movement.	 The
judgment	 on	 the	 hexagram,	 “Undertakings	 bring	 misfortune,”	 is	 derived	 from	 the	 position	 of	 the	 four
middle	lines,	none	of	which	is	in	its	proper	place.	“Nothing	that	would	further”	results	from	the	position	of
the	six	in	the	third	place	(one	of	the	rulers	of	the	hexagram),	which	is	over	the	hard	nine	in	the	second
place,	and	from	the	positions	of	the	other	two	rulers,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	and	the	six	at	the	top,	both
over	the	hard	nine	in	the	fourth	place.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	over	the	lake:
The	image	of	THE	MARRYING	MAIDEN.
Thus	the	superior	man
Understands	the	transitory
In	the	light	of	the	eternity	of	the	end.

In	the	autumn	everything	comes	to	its	end.	When	thunder	is	over	the	lake,	this	end	is	near.	The	eternity
of	the	end	is	suggested	by	the	trigram	Chên,	which	comes	forth	in	the	east	(spring)	and	reaches	the	end	of



its	activity	in	the	west	(autumn),	in	accordance	with	fixed	laws.	At	that	moment	the	death-dealing	power
of	 autumn,	which	destroys	all	 transient	beings,	becomes	active.	Through	knowledge	of	 these	 laws,	 one
reaches	those	regions	which	are	beyond	beginning	and	end,	birth	and	death.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	The	marrying	maiden	as	a	concubine.
A	lame	man	who	is	able	to	tread.
Undertakings	bring	good	fortune.
b)	“The	marrying	maiden	as	a	concubine,”	because	that	gives	duration.
“A	lame	man	who	is	able	to	tread.	Good	fortune,”	because	they	receive	each	other.

This	 line	 is	at	 the	bottom,	 in	an	 inferior	position.	Furthermore,	 it	 is	 in	 the	trigram	Tui,	 the	youngest
daughter;	hence	the	idea	of	a	concubine.	Tui,	the	youngest	daughter,	is	weak	in	relation	to	the	eldest	son
(just	as	Tui	is	weak	in	relation	to	Ch’ien	in	hexagram	10,	Lü,	TREADING,	in	which	the	image	of	a	lame,
one-eyed	man	likewise	occurs).	The	lowest	line	stands	for	the	foot,	hence	the	idea	of	a	lame	man,	because
there	 is	 no	 relationship	 with	 the	 fourth	 line.	 “Receive	 each	 other”	 means	 that	 the	 first	 line	 is	 in	 the
relationship	of	receiving	to	the	second,	serving	the	latter	 line	as	well	as	the	fifth;	therefore	it	 is	able	to
accomplish	something	indirectly	at	least,	and	advances.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	A	one-eyed	man	who	is	able	to	see.
The	perseverance	of	a	solitary	man	furthers.
b)	“The	perseverance	of	a	solitary	man	furthers.”	The	permanent	law	is	not	changed.

This	line	is	in	the	lowest	place	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Li,	which	means	eye.	It	stands	in	the	relationship
of	correspondence	to	the	fifth	line,	which	is	weak;	hence	the	image	of	a	one-eyed	man.

Since	the	line	is	strong	and	central,	it	is	not	changed,	although	the	line	that	belongs	to	it	is	weak	and
not	good.	It	is	true	that	this	brings	it	into	darkness	and	loneliness—it	is	under	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,
abyss,	that	is,	a	gloomy	valley—but	it	does	not	change	its	attitude	toward	the	law	and	remains	faithful	to
its	duty.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	marrying	maiden	as	a	slave.
She	marries	as	a	concubine.
b)	“The	marrying	maiden	as	a	slave”:	she	is	not	yet	in	the	appropriate	place.

This	is	a	weak	line	in	a	strong	place,	hence	not	in	the	appropriate	position.	Moreover,	it	stands	at	the
high	point	of	pleasure,	hence	throws	 itself	away	as	the	 lowest	 type	of	slave,	merely	 in	order	to	achieve
marriage	at	any	cost.	In	following	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	it	finds	shelter	as	a	concubine.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	marrying	maiden	draws	out	the	allotted	time.
A	late	marriage	comes	in	due	course.
b)	The	state	of	mind	that	 leads	to	drawing	out	of	the	allotted	time	indicates	a	desire	to	wait	for

something	before	going.
Of	the	lines	of	the	upper	and	the	lower	trigram,	only	the	fifth	and	the	second	line	stand	in	relationship.

But	 while	 the	 other	 two	 lines	 in	 Tui,	 being	 in	 the	 trigram	 of	 pleasure,	 also	 seek	 a	 marital	 connection
(although	by	a	detour	around	the	second	line),	the	lines	of	the	upper	trigram	that	are	not	bound	by	the
relationship	of	correspondence	move	away	from	the	idea	of	marriage.	The	present	line,	besides	having	no
correspondence	in	the	lower	trigram,	is	not	in	the	proper	place	(a	strong	line	in	a	weak	place)	and	is	in
the	 center	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 K’an,	 danger.	 Hence	 it	 holds	 back	 from	 marriage	 and	 waits	 for
conditions	 to	 change	 before	 it	 undertakes	 anything—the	 danger	 being	 eventually	 surmounted	 by
movement	(Chên).	But	the	new	situation	begins	only	after	the	present	cycle	of	events	has	come	to	an	end.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	The	sovereign	I	gave	his	daughter	in	marriage.
The	embroidered	garments	of	the	princess
Were	not	as	gorgeous
As	those	of	the	servingmaid.
The	moon	that	is	nearly	full
Brings	good	fortune.
b)	 “The	 sovereign	 I	 gave	 his	 daughter	 in	 marriage.	 Her	 embroidered	 garments	 were	 not	 as

gorgeous	as	those	of	the	servingmaid.”	The	place	is	in	the	middle,	hence	action	has	value.
The	place	is	central	and	honored.	Nevertheless,	the	line	is	yielding	and	condescends	to	the	strong	nine

in	 the	 second	place	 like	a	princess	marrying	an	 inferior.	Therefore	because	of	her	nobility	 she	pays	no
attention	to	outer	appearance,	and	the	servingmaid,	in	the	lowest	place,	is	more	gorgeous	than	she.	The
image	of	the	moon	appears	because	this	line	is	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an	(moon).

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	The	woman	holds	the	basket,	but	there	are	no	fruits	in	it.
The	man	stabs	the	sheep,	but	no	blood	flows.



Nothing	that	acts	to	further.
b)	The	reason	why	the	six	at	the	top	has	no	fruits	is	because	it	holds	an	empty	basket.

The	weak	six	at	the	top,	at	the	high	point	of	movement	(Chên)	and	without	relationship	to	a	strong	line,
no	longer	has	a	chance	of	marrying.	Hence	the	attempts	at	sacrifice	are	empty	and	unavailing—the	upper
trigram	symbolizes	an	empty	basket,	and	the	lower	trigram	Tui	has	the	sheep	for	its	animal.



55.	Fêng	/	Abundance	[Fullness]

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	When	it	is	said	in	the	Judgment,	“The	king	attains
abundance.	Be	not	sad.	Be	like	the	sun	at	midday,”	the	reference	is	to	this	line,	for	this	is	the	king’s	place.
The	line	is	yielding	and	in	the	center—the	character	of	the	sun	at	midday.

The	Sequence
That	which	attains	a	place	in	which	it	is	at	home	is	sure	to	become	great.	Hence	there	follows	the

hexagram	of	ABUNDANCE.	Abundance	means	greatness.
Miscellaneous	Notes
ABUNDANCE	means	many	occasions.

This	 hexagram	 is	 composed	 of	 Chên,	 which	 strives	 upward,	 and	 Li,	 which	 also	moves	 upward.	 The
nuclear	trigrams	are	Tui,	the	Joyous,	the	lake,	and	Sun,	the	Penetrating,	the	wind.	Hence	wind	and	water,
and	thunder	and	lightning,	are	together	here	and	all	this	points	to	great	power.	Something	of	a	climax	is
indicated	 in	 that	 Chên,	 which	 is	 the	 more	 vigorous	 in	 movement,	 is	 above.	 While	 Shih	 Ho,	 BITING
THROUGH	 (21)	 deals	 with	 the	 problem	 of	 surmounting	 a	 hindrance,	 here	 the	 hindrance	 is	 already
surmounted.	 Still,	 greatness	 at	 a	 pinnacle	 suggests	 the	 danger	 of	 regression.	 The	 light	 is	 darkened	 in
varying	degree	by	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	wood,	contained	within	the	hexagram.	The	hexagram	is	one	of
those	referring	to	the	mutability	of	all	earthly	things.	This	is	most	likely	also	the	meaning	of	the	saying,
“ABUNDANCE	means	many	occasions,”	that	is,	occasions	for	care	and	sorrow.

THE	JUDGMENT
ABUNDANCE	has	success.
The	king	attains	abundance.
Be	not	sad.
Be	like	the	sun	at	midday.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
ABUNDANCE	means	greatness.	Clarity	in	movement,	hence	abundance.
“The	king	attains	abundance.”	In	this	way	greatness	is	emphasized.
“Be	not	sad.	Be	like	the	sun	at	midday.”	One	should	give	light	to	the	whole	world.
When	 the	 sun	 stands	at	midday,	 it	 begins	 to	 set;	when	 the	moon	 is	 full,	 it	 begins	 to	wane.	The

fullness	and	emptiness	of	heaven	and	earth	wane	and	wax	in	the	course	of	time.	How	much	truer	is
this	of	men,	or	of	spirits	and	gods!
Fêng	represents	a	time	when	clarity	and	progress	bring	about	greatness	and	prosperity	in	public	life.

To	achieve	these,	there	is	needed	a	strong	and	leading	personality,	drawing	to	itself	others	of	like	nature.
Therefore	it	is	not	the	relation	of	correspondence	but	that	of	congruity	between	the	lines	which	must	be
taken	into	account	(cf.	the	nine	at	the	beginning	and	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place,	as	well	as	the	six	in	the
second	 place	 and	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place).	 But	 such	 a	 time	 of	 very	 great	 culture	 also	 carries	 hidden
dangers.	 For	 according	 to	 the	 universal	 law	 of	 events,	 every	 increase	 is	 followed	 by	 decrease,	 and	 all
fullness	 is	 followed	 by	 emptiness.	 There	 is	 only	 one	 means	 of	 making	 foundations	 firm	 in	 times	 of
greatness,	 namely,	 spiritual	 expansion.	 Every	 sort	 of	 limitation	 brings	 a	 bitter	 retribution	 in	 its	 train.
Abundance	 can	 endure	 only	 if	 ever	 larger	 groups	 are	 brought	 to	 share	 in	 it,	 for	 only	 then	 can	 the
movement	continue	without	turning	into	its	opposite.

THE	IMAGE
Both	thunder	and	lightning	come:
The	image	of	ABUNDANCE.
Thus	the	superior	man	decides	lawsuits
And	carries	out	punishments.

The	 Image	 is	 immediately	 intelligible,	 especially	 in	 association	 with	 the	 hexagram	 of	 BITING
THROUGH	(21).	The	trigrams	Li,	clarity,	and	Chên,	shock,	terror,	give	the	prerequisites	for	a	clearing	of
the	atmosphere	by	the	thunderstorm	of	a	criminal	trial.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	When	a	man	meets	his	destined	ruler,
They	can	be	together	ten	days,
And	it	is	not	a	mistake.
Going	meets	with	recognition.
b)	“They	can	be	together	ten	days,	and	it	is	not	a	mistake.”	More	than	ten	days	is	harmful.

The	line	is	strong	and	clear.	The	destined	ruler	that	it	meets,	and	that	is	of	like	kind,	is	the	nine	in	the
fourth	place.	The	Chinese	word	hsün	means	a	space	of	ten	days,	a	complete	cycle.	Despite	the	situation	in
ABUNDANCE,	one	may	spend	a	full	cycle	of	time	with	a	friend	of	kindred	spirit	without	fear	of	making	a
mistake.	One	may	therefore	go	unhesitatingly	and	seek	him	out,	if	he	is	in	a	high	position.	Nonetheless,
the	commentary	warns	against	overstepping	this	time	limit	and	against	clinging	to	him	after	completion	of
the	task.	This	is	harmful.	One	must	be	able	to	stop	at	the	right	moment	especially	in	times	of	abundance.
The	Sung	interpreters	take	the	word	hsün	 in	the	sense	of	“similar,”	so	that	it	would	be	an	additional



emphasizing	of	p’ei—“of	like	kind,	destined	for	someone.”
Six	in	the	second	place:

	
a)	The	curtain	is	of	such	fullness
That	the	polestars	can	be	seen	at	noon.
Through	going	one	meets	with	mistrust	and	hate.
If	one	rouses	him	through	truth,
Good	fortune	comes.
b)	“If	one	rouses	him	through	truth”—that	is,	one	must	rouse	his	will	through	trustworthiness.

The	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	wood,	darkens	the	lines	it	covers,	but	the	darkening	here	and	as	regards	the
nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	less	marked	than	in	the	case	of	the	nine	in	the	third	place,	the	center,	where	it
is	particularly	strong.	Because	this	second	line	is	weak,	it	meets	only	with	doubt	and	hatred	when	it	turns
toward	the	prince	who	belongs	to	it,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place,	which	is	also	weak.	But	since	it	is	central
and	correct,	the	power	of	inner	truth	will	enable	it	to	overcome	the	separation	and	to	arouse	the	will	of
the	ruler.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	underbrush	is	of	such	abundance
That	the	small	stars	can	be	seen	at	noon.
He	breaks	his	right	arm.	No	blame.
b)	“The	underbrush	is	of	such	abundance”	that	one	can	carry	out	no	great	transactions.
“He	breaks	his	right	arm”:	in	the	end,	one	must	not	try	to	do	anything.

Here	 the	darkening	 is	at	 its	height.	The	nuclear	 trigram	Sun	 is	 joined	with	 the	nuclear	 trigram	Tui,
lake,	which	 limits	 the	 inherent	possibility	of	accomplishing	great	 things.	Tui	means	 to	break.	The	 right
arm	is	denoted	by	the	weak	six	at	the	top,	which,	in	accordance	with	the	relations	in	this	hexagram,	is	not
to	 be	 taken	 into	 account	 as	 an	 aid	 to	 the	 strong	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place.	 If	 one	 refrains	 from	 action,
recognizing	that	it	is	impossible,	one	remains	blameless.
The	word	p’ei,	rendered	as	“underbrush,”	means	also	a	body	of	water,	and	the	word	mo,	rendered	as

“small	stars,”	means	also	foam,	drizzle.	However,	the	interpretation	given	above	seems	to	suit	the	context
better.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	curtain	is	of	such	fullness
That	the	polestars	can	be	seen	at	noon.
He	meets	his	ruler,	who	is	of	like	kind.
Good	fortune.
b)	“The	curtain	is	of	such	fullness”:	the	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.
“The	polestars	can	be	seen	at	noon.”	He	is	dark	and	not	light-giving.
“He	meets	his	ruler,	who	is	of	like	kind.	Good	fortune.”	This	means	action.

The	 first	 sentence	 here	 is	 the	 same	 as	 in	 the	 case	 of	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place;	 the	 latter	 is	 the
beginning	and	the	present	line	the	ending	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	wood.	The	place	is	not	appropriate,
because	 this	 is	a	hard	 line	 in	a	yielding	place.	The	 line	 is	no	 longer	 in	 the	 trigram	Li,	hence	no	 longer
light-giving	by	nature.	Light	is	below.	However,	movement	enables	it	to	meet	the	first	line,	which	is	of	like
kind,	 i.e.,	 likewise	 strong.	 Thus	 light	 comes	 through	 action	 (the	 first	 line	 is	 light,	 because	 it	 is	 in	 the
trigram	Li),	and	with	it	good	fortune.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Lines	are	coming,
Blessing	and	fame	draw	near.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	comes	from	the	fact	that	it	bestows	blessing.

This	line	is	related	to	the	six	in	the	second	place.	In	the	latter	case	the	expression	is	“going,”	here	it	is
“coming.”	The	lines	are	the	light,	clear	force	just	approaching	by	reason	of	the	trigram	Li,	light—whose
central	line	is	the	six	in	the	second	place—and	thus	making	possible	blessing	and	fame.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	His	house	is	in	a	state	of	abundance.
He	screens	off	his	family.
He	peers	through	the	gate
And	no	longer	perceives	anyone.
For	three	years	he	sees	nothing.
Misfortune.
b)	“His	house	is	in	a	state	of	abundance.”	He	flutters	about	at	the	border	of	heaven.
“He	peers	through	the	gate	and	no	longer	perceives	anyone.”	He	screens	himself	off.

The	weak	line	at	the	high	point	of	movement	goes	too	far.	Thus	it	seems	to	rise	continually	higher,	but
precisely	through	this	it	loses	its	hold	increasingly	and	moves	ever	farther	from	the	light—all	the	more	so
as	it	is	itself	darkening	the	nine	in	the	third	place.	Hence	the	six	at	the	top	falls	into	a	hopelessly	isolated
state,	for	which	it	has	only	itself	to	blame.



56.	Lü	/	The	Wanderer

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place.	Therefore	it	 is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the
Decision,	“The	yielding	attains	the	middle	outside,”	and	also,	“Keeping	still	and	adhering	to	clarity.”	The
fifth	line	is	in	the	outer	trigram;	this	symbolizes	the	wanderer	in	foreign	parts.	It	is	in	the	middle	place	as
ruler	of	the	trigram	Li;	this	symbolizes	attainment	of	the	mean	and	adherence	to	clarity.

The	Sequence
Whatever	greatness	may	exhaust	itself	upon,	this	much	is	certain:	it	loses	its	home.	Hence	there

follows	the	hexagram	of	THE	WANDERER.
Miscellaneous	Notes
He	who	has	few	friends:	this	is	THE	WANDERER.

This	hexagram	is	so	organized	that	the	two	primary	trigrams	tend	to	pull	apart.	Li,	flame,	goes	upward,
Kên,	the	mountain,	presses	downward;	their	union	is	only	temporary.	Kên	(mountain)	is	a	hostel,	Li	(fire)
is	 the	wanderer	who	 does	 not	 tarry	 there	 long	 but	must	 push	 on.	 This	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the
preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	WANDERER.	Success	through	smallness.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune
To	the	wanderer.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“THE	 WANDERER.	 Success	 through	 smallness”:	 the	 yielding	 attains	 the	 middle	 outside	 and

submits	to	the	firm.
Keeping	still	and	adhering	to	clarity;	hence	success	in	small	things.
“Perseverance	brings	good	fortune	to	the	wanderer.”	The	meaning	of	the	time	of	THE	WANDERER

is	truly	great.
The	ruler	of	 the	hexagram	is	the	six	 in	the	fifth	place.	 It	 is	yielding,	hence	 it	represents	reserve	and

unpretentiousness.	 It	 is	 in	 the	middle,	hence	 it	 cannot	be	humiliated,	 though	 it	 is	outside,	 in	a	 strange
land.	 It	 submits	 to	 the	 strong	 lines	 above	 and	 below,	 hence	 does	 not	 provoke	 misfortune.	 The	 lower
trigram	Kên	indicates	keeping	still,	inner	reserve,	while	the	upper	trigram	Li	indicates	clinging	to	outside
things.	A	wanderer	 in	a	 foreign	country	cannot	easily	 find	his	proper	place,	hence	 it	 is	a	great	 thing	to
grasp	the	meaning	of	the	time.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	THE	WANDERER.
Thus	the	superior	man
Is	clear-minded	and	cautious
In	imposing	penalties,
And	protracts	no	lawsuits.

Usually,	 it	 is	a	question	of	criminal	cases	when	clarity	and	movement	come	together	 (hexagrams	21,
BITING	THROUGH,	and	55,	ABUNDANCE).	Here	also	we	have	clarity,	in	the	upper	trigram;	the	calm	of
the	 mountain	 signifies	 caution	 in	 imposing	 penalties.	 Dispatch	 in	 the	 settlement	 of	 criminal	 cases	 is
moreover	indicated	in	the	mutual	relationship	of	the	trigrams.	Fire	does	not	linger	on	the	mountain,	but
passes	on	rapidly.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	If	the	wanderer	busies	himself	with	trivial	things,
He	draws	down	misfortune	upon	himself.
b)	 “If	 the	 wanderer	 busies	 himself	 with	 trivial	 things”:	 thereby	 his	 will	 is	 spent,	 and	 this	 is	 a

misfortune.
This	 is	 a	weak	 line	at	 the	very	bottom	of	 the	 trigram	Kên,	hence	 the	 suggestion	of	unworthy,	 trivial

things.	Kên	denotes	standing	still.	The	line	is	far	away	from	the	trigram	Li,	clarity,	hence	it	has	no	breadth
of	vision	and	consumes	 its	will	power	on	 trivialities.	For	 this	 reason	 its	connection	with	 the	nine	 in	 the
third	 place	 has	 not	 an	 enlightening	 but	 a	 harmful	 effect—just	 as	 throughout	 the	 hexagram,	 fire	 is
regarded	chiefly	as	a	consuming,	injurious	force.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	The	wanderer	comes	to	an	inn.
He	has	his	property	with	him.
He	wins	the	steadfastness1	of	a	young	servant.
b)	“He	wins	the	steadfastness	of	a	young	servant.”	This	is	not	a	mistake	in	the	end.

This	line	is	yielding	and	central,	in	the	middle	of	the	trigram	Kên,	which	means	door	and	hut;	hence	the
image	of	an	inn.	The	nuclear	trigram	Sun	means	market	and	gain;	hence,	“He	has	his	property	with	him.”
The	young	servant	is	the	six	at	the	beginning.



Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	wanderer’s	inn	burns	down.
He	loses	the	steadfastness	of	his	young	servant.
Danger.
b)	“The	wanderer’s	inn	burns	down.”	This	is	a	loss	for	him	personally.
If	he	deals	like	a	stranger	with	his	subordinate,	it	is	only	right	that	he	should	lose	him.

The	line	is	too	hard,	since	it	is	hard	in	a	strong	place.	Hence	it	does	not	show	devotion	to	its	superior,
therefore	the	latter	does	not	help	it,	and	its	dwelling	burns	down.	Owing	to	its	hardness,	it	is	unfriendly
toward	its	subordinates	and	so	loses	their	loyal	affection,	which	naturally	means	danger.	The	line	is	at	the
top	 of	 the	 trigram	 Kên,	 meaning	 hut,	 and	 Li,	 fire,	 is	 immediately	 above	 it,	 hence	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 hut
burning	down.	The	servant	is	the	six	at	the	beginning.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	wanderer	rests	in	a	shelter.
He	obtains	his	property	and	an	ax.
My	heart	is	not	glad.
b)	“The	wanderer	rests	in	a	shelter.”	He	has	not	yet	obtained	his	place.
“He	obtains	his	property	and	an	ax.”	But	he	is	not	yet	glad	at	heart.

The	shelter	is	only	temporary,	because	the	line	is	outside	the	trigram	Kên.	It	rests	only	briefly,	because
it	has	not	yet	reached	its	true	place	(the	line	is	strong,	the	place	is	weak).	Although	it	has	property,	it	also
needs	an	ax	for	defense	(Li	means	weapons,	and	the	nuclear	trigram	Tui	means	both	metal	and	injury).
Hence	it	is	not	yet	glad	at	heart.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	He	shoots	a	pheasant.
It	drops	with	the	first	arrow.
In	the	end	this	brings	both	praise	and	office.
b)	In	the	end	he	rises	through	praise	and	office.

This	 line,	 which	 is	 yielding,	 and	 in	 the	 central	 place	 outside,2	 is	 the	 wanderer.	 Being	 central	 and
devoted,	it	succeeds	in	gaining	friends	below	(the	nine	in	the	fourth	place)	and	an	official	position	above
(nine	at	the	top);	thus	it	rises.
The	 trigram	Li	 denotes	 pheasant	 and	weapons.	 The	 nuclear	 trigram	Tui	 is	metal,	 hence	 the	 idea	 of

shooting.	Tui	is	also	the	mouth,	hence	praise.
Chu	Hsi	interprets	the	second	sentence	as	follows:	“An	arrow	is	lost.”	Grammatically	this	version	is	of

course	also	possible.
Nine	at	the	top:

	
a)	The	bird’s	nest	burns	up.
The	wanderer	laughs	at	first,
Then	must	needs	lament	and	weep.
Through	carelessness	he	loses	his	cow.
Misfortune.
b)	Being	at	the	top	as	a	wanderer	rightly	leads	to	being	burnt	up.
“Through	carelessness	he	loses	his	cow.”	In	the	end	he	hears	nothing.

The	 strong	 line	at	 the	 top,	whose	movement	moreover	 tends	upward,	 loses	 its	 foundations.	Thus	all
gaiety	 leads	 only	 to	 losses,	 because	 the	 line	 neglects	 all	 too	much	 the	 duties	 of	 a	wanderer,	 and	 even
injury	does	not	make	it	the	wiser.
Li	is	bird	and	also	flame.	The	place	is	high	up,	over	the	nuclear	trigram	Sun,	hence	the	image	of	a	nest.

The	 idea	 of	 laughing	 derives	 from	 the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Tui,	 meaning	 gaiety	 and	 mouth.	 The	 idea	 of
lamenting	 derives	 from	 the	 destructive	 force	 lurking	 in	 Tui.	 Li	 is	 cow;	 it	 is	 lost	 because	 of	 gaiety	 and
carelessness	in	a	high	place.	There	is	no	hope	for	this	line;	it	never	comes	to	its	senses,	because	it	merely
goes	on	striving	further	upward,	giving	no	thought	at	all	to	return.



57.	Sun	/	The	Gentle	(Penetrating,	Wind)

Although	 this	 hexagram	 is	 conditioned	 by	 the	 two	 yin	 lines,	 there	 is	 only	 one	 feminine	 hexagram,
namely	Li,	THE	CLINGING,	 in	which	 the	 yin	 lines	are	 the	 rulers.	They	are	 rulers	because	 they	occupy
middle	places.	The	two	yin	lines	here	are	the	constituting	rulers	of	the	hexagram	but	cannot	be	regarded
as	the	governing	rulers.	The	governing	ruler	is	rather	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	for	only	one	who	is	in	an
honored	place	can	“spread	his	commands	abroad	and	carry	out	his	undertakings.”	When	therefore	 it	 is
said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision,	“The	firm	penetrates	to	the	middle	and	to	the	correct,	and	its	will
is	done,”	the	reference	is	to	the	fifth	line.

The	Sequence
The	 wanderer	 has	 nothing	 that	 might	 receive	 him;	 hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of	 THE

GENTLE,	THE	PENETRATING.	The	Gentle	means	going	into.
This	means	that	the	wanderer	in	his	forlornness	has	no	place	to	stay	in,	and	that	hence	there	follows

Sun,	the	hexagram	of	homecoming.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	GENTLE	means	crouching.

The	 dark	 line	 is	 below,	 it	 crouches	 down	 beneath	 the	 light	 lines,	 and	 through	 this	 gentle	 crouching
succeeds	in	penetrating	among	the	strong	lines.

Appended	Judgments
THE	GENTLE	shows	the	exercise	of	character.	Through	THE	GENTLE	one	is	able	to	weigh	things

and	remain	hidden.	Through	THE	GENTLE	one	is	able	to	take	special	circumstances	into	account.
Gentle	penetration	makes	the	character	capable	of	 influencing	the	outside	world	and	gaining	control

over	it.	For	thus	one	can	understand	things	in	their	inner	nature	without	having	to	step	into	the	forefront
oneself.	Herein	lies	the	power	of	influence.	In	this	position,	one	is	able	to	make	the	exceptions	demanded
by	the	time,	without	being	inconsistent.

Among	 the	 eight	 trigrams,	 Sun	 occupies	 the	 southeast,	 between	 spring	 and	 summer.	 It	 means	 the
flowing	of	beings	into	their	forms,	it	means	baptism	and	giving	life.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	GENTLE.	Success	through	what	is	small.
It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.
It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
Penetration	repeated,	in	order	to	spread	commands	abroad.
The	firm	penetrates	to	the	middle	and	to	the	correct,	and	its	will	is	done.
Both	of	the	yielding	lines	submit	to	the	strong;	therefore	it	is	said:	“Success	through	what	is	small.

It	furthers	one	to	have	somewhere	to	go.	It	furthers	one	to	see	the	great	man.”
This	 hexagram	 is	 constituted	 by	 a	 doubling	 of	 the	 trigram	 Sun,	 which	 means	 on	 the	 one	 hand

gentleness,	adaptability,	on	the	other	penetration.	In	the	issuing	of	commands,	it	is	all-important	that	they
really	penetrate	the	consciousness	of	the	subordinates.	This	is	effected	by	adaptation	of	the	commands	to
their	understanding.	A	twofold	penetration	 is	required:	 first	penetration	of	a	command	to	the	feeling	of
the	 vassals,	 scattering	 the	 evil	 hidden	 in	 secret	 recesses,	 as	 the	 wind	 scatters	 clouds;	 second,	 a	 still
deeper	penetration,	to	the	depths	of	consciousness,	where	the	hidden	good	must	be	awakened.	To	obtain
this	effect,	commands	must	be	given	repetitively.1

The	 text	 is	 further	 explained	 in	 the	 light	 of	 the	 structure	 of	 the	hexagram.	The	 strong	 line	 that	 has
penetrated	to	the	center—the	correct	place	for	it—is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place;	therefore	its	will	is	done,
and	 it	 is	 favorable	to	undertake	something.	The	yielding	 lines	 in	the	 first	and	the	fourth	place	obey	the
firm	ruler	of	the	hexagram	above	them.	Hence	success	is	connected	with	the	small,	which	is	furthered	by
seeing	the	great	man	(the	nine	in	the	fifth	place).

THE	IMAGE
Winds	following	one	upon	the	other:
The	image	of	THE	GENTLY	PENETRATING.
Thus	the	superior	man
Spreads	his	commands	abroad
And	carries	out	his	undertakings.

Of	 the	 two	 winds	 the	 first	 disperses	 resistances,	 “spreads	 his	 commands	 abroad,”	 and	 the	 second
accomplishes	the	work,	“carries	out	his	undertakings.”

THE	LINES

Six	at	the	beginning:
	

a)	In	advancing	and	in	retreating,
The	perseverance	of	a	warrior	furthers.
b)	“In	advancing	and	in	retreating”:	the	will	wavers.
“The	perseverance	of	a	warrior	furthers.”	The	will	is	controlled.

This	line	is	yielding	and	at	the	very	bottom	of	the	hexagram	of	THE	GENTLE,	hence	the	indecision.	But



in	subordinating	itself	to	the	strong	line	over	it,	it	is	sustained	by	military	discipline.
Nine	in	the	second	place:

	
a)	Penetration	under	the	bed.
Priests	and	magicians	are	used	in	great	number.
Good	fortune.	No	blame.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	great	number	is	due	to	the	fact	that	one	has	attained	the	middle.

The	 line	 is	 strong	but	 central,	 hence	 indicates	good	 fortune.	The	 trigram	Sun	means	wood,	 and	 the
divided	line	below	stands	for	legs;	hence	the	image	of	a	bed.	The	nuclear	trigram	Tui	means	mouth	and
magician.	By	submitting	to	the	strong	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	who	is	of	like	kind,	the	line	is	able	to	aid	the
ruler	 in	 spreading	 his	 commands,	 because	 it	 penetrates	 to	 the	 most	 secret	 corners.	 Priests	 are	 the
intermediaries	 between	 men	 and	 gods;	 magicians	 serve	 as	 the	 intermediaries	 between	 gods	 and	 men.
Here	we	have	penetration	of	the	realms	of	the	visible	and	the	invisible,	whereby	it	becomes	possible	for
everything	to	be	set	right.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Repeated	penetration.	Humiliation.
b)	The	humiliation	of	repeated	penetration	comes	from	the	fact	that	the	will	exhausts	itself.

The	third	place	is	intermediate	in	the	relation	of	the	two	Sun	trigrams:	one	trigram	is	at	its	close,	the
other	just	beginning;	hence	penetration	repeated.	The	nine	in	the	third	place	is	too	hard	and	not	central.
Although	 this	 character	 is	 not	 suitable	 for	 gentle	 penetration	 to	 the	 core	 of	 things,	 it	 is	 attempted
nonetheless.	No	result	is	achieved.	Everything	remains	in	a	state	of	irresolute	vacillation.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Remorse	vanishes.
During	the	hunt
Three	kinds	of	game	are	caught.
b)	“During	the	hunt	three	kinds	of	game	are	caught.”	This	is	meritorious.

The	nuclear	trigram	Li	means	weapons,	hence	the	hunt.	The	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	correct,	submits
to	the	ruler,	and	brings	the	three	lower	lines	to	him.	In	this	way	it	acquires	merit,	and	averts	the	remorse
that	might	be	occasioned	by	too	much	weakness.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	vanishes.
Nothing	that	does	not	further.
No	beginning,	but	an	end.
Before	the	change,	three	days.
After	the	change,	three	days.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place	inheres	in	the	fact	that	the	place	is	correct	and

central.
This	 line,	 the	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 is	 central	 in	 the	 upper	 trigram;	 hence	 it	 is	 the	 source	 of	 that

influencing	 through	 commands	 which	 is	 the	 characteristic	 action	 of	 the	 hexagram.	 In	 contrast	 to	 the
situation	 in	 Ku,	 WORK	 ON	 WHAT	 HAS	 BEEN	 SPOILED	 (18),	 where	 it	 is	 question	 of	 compensating	 for
what	the	father	and	mother	have	spoiled,	it	is	work	on	public	matters	that	is	described	here.	Such	work	is
characterized	not	 so	much	by	 love	 that	 covers	up	defects	as	by	 impartial	 justice,	 as	 symbolized	by	 the
west	(metal,	autumn),	with	which	the	eighth	cyclic	sign,	Kêng2	(rendered	as	“change”),	is	associated.

In	order	to	enforce	commands,	 it	 is	necessary	first	to	abandon	a	wrong	beginning,	then	to	attain	the
good	end;	hence	the	saying:	“No	beginning,	but	an	end.”	This	saying	is	elaborated	in	the	words:	“Before
the	sign	Kêng,	 three	days.	After	 the	sign	Kêng,	 three	days.”	The	problem	turns	 therefore	on	a	decisive
elimination	of	something	that	has	developed	as	a	wrong	beginning.	Three	“days”	before	Kêng	the	summer
draws	 to	 a	 close;	 then	 comes	 its	 end.	 Three	 “days”	 after	 Kêng	 comes	 winter,	 the	 end	 of	 the	 year.
Therefore,	although	one	has	not	achieved	a	beginning,	at	least	the	end	is	attainable.	(This	situation	differs
from	that	in	hexagram	18,	Ku,	which	lies	in	the	middle	between	end	and	beginning.)

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Penetration	under	the	bed.
He	loses	his	property	and	his	ax.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
b)	“Penetration	under	the	bed.”	At	the	top,	the	end	has	come.
“He	loses	his	property	and	his	ax.”	Is	this	right?	It	brings	misfortune.

By	penetration	under	the	bed,	the	second	line	establishes	connection	between	what	is	above	and	what
is	below,	and	so	sets	everything	in	order.	Here,	however,	the	penetration	signifies	merely	dependence	and
instability.	Thus	 the	 line	 loses	what	 it	possesses	of	 firmness	 (the	 line,	strong	 in	 itself,	 loses	 its	strength
because	 it	 is	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 hexagram	 of	 gentleness),	 together	 with	 its	 ax	 (the	 nuclear	 trigram	 Tui
means	 metal),	 so	 that	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 capable	 of	 any	 decision.	 Persistence	 in	 this	 attitude	 is	 definitely
harmful.



58.	Tui	/	The	Joyous,	Lake

The	two	yin	lines	are	the	constituting	rulers	of	the	hexagram	but	are	incapable	of	acting	as	governing
rulers.	The	second	and	the	fifth	line	are	the	governing	rulers.	Therefore	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on
the	Decision:	“The	firm	is	in	the	middle,	the	yielding	is	without.	Joyousness	and	perseverance	further.”

The	Sequence
When	 one	 has	 penetrated	 something,	 one	 rejoices.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of	 THE

JOYOUS.	The	Joyous	means	to	rejoice.
Miscellaneous	Notes
THE	JOYOUS	is	manifest.

Tui	 is	 the	 lake,	which	 rejoices	 and	 refreshes	 all	 living	 things.	 Furthermore,	 Tui	 is	 the	mouth.	When
human	beings	give	 joy	 to	 one	 another	 through	 their	 feelings,	 it	 is	manifested	by	 the	mouth.	A	 yin	 line
becomes	manifest	above	two	yang	lines;	this	indicates	how	these	two	principles	give	joy	to	each	other	and
how	this	becomes	manifest	outwardly.	On	the	other	hand	Tui	is	linked	with	the	west	and	with	autumn.	Its
“stage	 of	 change”1	 is	 metal.	 The	 cutting	 and	 destroying	 quality	 is	 the	 other	 side	 of	 its	 meaning.	 This
hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
THE	JOYOUS.	Success.
Perseverance	is	favorable.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
THE	JOYOUS	means	pleasure.	The	firm	is	in	the	middle,	the	yielding	is	without.	To	be	joyous—and

with	this	to	have	perseverance—furthers;	thus	does	one	submit	to	heaven	and	accord	with	men.
When	one	leads	the	way	for	the	people	joyously,	they	forget	their	drudgery;	when	one	confronts

difficulty	joyously,	the	people	forget	death.	The	greatest	thing	in	making	the	people	joyous	is	that	they
keep	one	another	in	order.2
The	firm	in	the	middle	are	the	two	lines	in	the	second	and	the	fifth	place,	while	the	yielding	without	are

the	six	 in	the	third	place	and	the	six	at	the	top.	That	is	the	right	kind	of	 joy	which	is	 inwardly	firm	and
outwardly	gentle.	This	joy	is	also	the	best	means	of	government.

THE	IMAGE
Lakes	resting	one	on	the	other:
The	image	of	THE	JOYOUS.
Thus	the	superior	man	joins	with	his	friends
For	discussion	and	practice.

Tui	means	lake,	also	mouth.	The	repetition	of	mouth	means	general	discussion,	the	repetition	of	lake
means	practice.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Contented	joyousness.	Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	 fortune	of	contented	 joyousness	 lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	one’s	way	has	not	yet	become

doubtful.
Firmness	and	modesty	are	the	prerequisites	of	harmonious	joy.	Both	are	fulfilled	in	this	strong	line	in	a

lowly	place.	When	the	light	principle	 is	bound	to	the	shadowy,	there	are	many	doubts	and	scruples	that
interfere	with	joyousness.	The	line	at	the	beginning	is	still	far	from	all	such	complications,	hence	sure	of
good	fortune.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Sincere	joyousness.	Good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	sincere	joyousness	consists	in	having	faith	in	one’s	own	will.

This	 line	 is	 in	 close	 relationship	 with	 the	 dark	 third	 line,	 hence	 doubt	 and	 remorse	 could	 set	 in.
However,	because	it	is	central	and	firm,	the	sincerity	of	its	nature	and	of	its	position	prove	stronger	than
the	relationship.	It	trusts	itself,	is	sincere	toward	others,	and	therefore	meets	with	belief.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Coming	joyousness.	Misfortune.
b)	The	misfortune	of	coming	joyousness	lies	in	the	fact	that	its	place	is	not	the	proper	one.

A	weak	line	in	a	strong	place,	at	the	high	point	of	joyousness—here	control	is	lacking.	When	a	man	is
open	to	distractions	from	without,	they	stream	toward	him	and	force	their	way	in.	Misfortune	is	certain,
because	he	allows	himself	to	be	overwhelmed	by	the	pleasures	he	has	attracted.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Joyousness	that	is	weighed	is	not	at	peace.
After	ridding	himself	of	mistakes	a	man	has	joy.



b)	The	joy	of	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	brings	blessing.
This	 line	 holds	 the	middle	 between	 the	 strong	 ruler,	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	with	which	 it	 has	 a

relationship	of	 receiving,	and	 the	yielding	 six	 in	 the	 third	place,	which	 is	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 holding
together	 with	 it	 and	 is	 trying	 to	 seduce	 it.	 Although	 the	 person	 represented	 has	 still	 not	 altogether
attained	peace	 in	 this	situation,	he	possesses	enough	 inner	strength	both	 to	decide	whom	he	wishes	 to
follow	and	to	sever	the	relation	with	the	six	in	the	third	place.	From	this,	good	fortune	and	blessing	result
both	for	him	and	for	others.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Sincerity	toward	disintegrating	influences	is	dangerous.
b)	“Sincerity	toward	disintegrating	influences”:	the	place	is	correct	and	appropriate.

The	disintegrating	influences	are	represented	by	the	six	at	the	top.	The	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	which	is
strong	 and	 correct,	 is	 inclined	 to	 place	 confidence	 in	 the	 line	 above.	 This	 is	 dangerous.	 However,	 the
danger	is	avoidable,	because	by	nature	and	position	the	present	line	is	strong	enough	to	overcome	these
influences.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Seductive	joyousness.
b)	The	reason	why	the	six	at	the	top	seduces	to	pleasure	is	that	it	is	not	bright.

This	line	is	similar	to	the	six	in	the	third	place.	But	while	the	latter	is	in	the	inner	trigram	and	draws
pleasures	 to	 itself	 through	 its	 desire,	 the	 six	 at	 the	 top	 is	 in	 the	 outer	 trigram	 and	 tempts	 others	 to
pleasure.	 “Seductive	 joyousness”	 does	 not	 pertain	 to	 the	 person	 consulting	 the	 oracle	 but	 shows	 a
situation	 confronting	 him.	 It	 rests	 with	 him	 whether	 he	 will	 let	 himself	 be	 seduced.	 It	 is,	 however,
important	to	be	on	one’s	guard	in	face	of	such	dubious	situations.

There	 is	 a	 somewhat	 different	 interpretation	 for	 the	 “a”	 text,	 likewise	 based	 upon	 the	 Chinese
literature	on	the	I	Ching.



59.	Huan	/	Dispersion	[Dissolution]

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	because	only	a	person	occupying	an	honored
place	can	bring	order	into	world-wide	dispersion.	However,	the	nine	in	the	second	place	is	within,	in	order
to	strengthen	the	foundations,	and	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	is	in	the	relationship	of	receiving	to	the	nine
in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 in	 order	 to	 complete	 the	work	 of	 the	 latter.	 Consequently	 these	 two	 lines	 also	 have
important	functions	within	the	hexagram.	This	is	why	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“The
firm	comes	 and	does	not	 exhaust	 itself.	 The	 yielding	 receives	 a	 place	without,	 and	 the	 one	 above	 is	 in
harmony	with	it.”

The	Sequence
After	joy	comes	dispersal.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	DISPERSION.	Dispersion	means

scattering.
Miscellaneous	Notes
DISPERSION	means	scattering.
Appended	Judgments
They	 scooped	 out	 tree	 trunks	 for	 boats	 and	 they	 hardened	wood	 in	 the	 fire	 to	make	 oars.	 The

advantage	of	boats	and	oars	lay	in	providing	means	of	communication.	They	probably	took	this	from
the	hexagram	of	DISPERSION.
This	 hexagram	 has	 a	 double	 meaning.	 The	 first	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 image	 of	 wind	 over	 water,

indicating	 the	 breaking	 up	 of	 ice	 and	 rigidity.	 The	 second	meaning	 is	 penetration;	 Sun	penetrates	 into
K’an,	 the	 Abysmal,	 indicating	 dispersion,	 division.	 As	 against	 this	 process	 of	 breaking	 up,	 the	 task	 of
reuniting	presents	itself;	this	meaning	also	is	contained	in	the	hexagram.
The	image	of	wood	over	water	gives	rise	to	the	idea	of	a	boat.

THE	JUDGMENT
DISPERSION.	Success.
The	king	approaches	his	temple.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Perseverance	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“DISPERSION.	Success.”	The	firm	comes	and	does	not	exhaust	itself.	The	yielding	receives	a	place

without,	and	the	one	above	is	in	harmony	with	it.
“The	king	approaches	his	temple.”	The	king	is	in	the	middle.
“It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.”	To	rely	on	wood	is	productive	of	merit.

“Comes”	refers	to	position	within	the	 inner,	 i.e.,	 lower	trigram,	while	“goes”	refers	to	position	 in	the
outer,	 i.e.,	 upper	 trigram.	 The	 firm	 element	 that	 comes	 is	 therefore	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 second	 place.
Occupying	the	middle	place	in	the	lower	trigram,	it	creates	for	the	light	principle	placed	in	the	midst	of
dark	 lines	 a	 basis	 of	 activity	 as	 inexhaustible	 as	 water	 (K’AN).	 The	 yielding	 line	 that	 receives	 a	 place
without	and	acts	 in	harmony	with	 the	one	above	 is	 the	six	 in	 the	 fourth	place,	 the	minister.	The	action
connoted	by	the	hexagram	is	based	upon	the	reciprocal	relationships	between	the	three	lines	in	the	fifth,
the	fourth,	and	the	second	place.
The	 king	 in	 the	 middle	 is	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 His	 central	 position	 denotes	 the	 inner

concentration	that	enables	him	to	hold	together	the	elements	striving	to	break	asunder.
The	temple	is	suggested	by	the	upper	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain,	house.	The	idea	of	crossing	the

great	water	derives	from	Sun	(wood)	and	K’an	(water).
THE	IMAGE
The	wind	drives	over	the	water:
The	image	of	DISPERSION.
Thus	the	kings	of	old	sacrificed	to	the	Lord
And	built	temples.

This	 again	 indicates	 an	 inward	 striving	 to	 hold	 together,	 through	 the	 fostering	 of	 religion,	 elements
outwardly	falling	asunder.	The	task	is	to	preserve	the	connection	between	God	and	man	and	between	the
ancestors	and	their	posterity.	Here	likewise	the	image	of	the	temple	is	suggested	by	the	nuclear	trigram
Kên.	Finally,	the	idea	of	entering	is	suggested	by	Sun,	and	the	idea	of	the	dark	by	K’an.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	He	brings	help	with	the	strength	of	a	horse.
Good	fortune.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	the	six	at	the	beginning	is	based	on	its	devotion.

The	strong	horse	is	the	nine	in	the	second	place.	K’an	means	a	strong	horse	with	a	beautiful	back.	The
six	 at	 the	beginning	 is	weak	 and	 in	 a	 lowly	 place,	 and	does	not	 itself	 possess	 the	 strength	 to	 stop	 the
dissolution.	But	since	the	line	is	only	at	the	beginning	of	the	dissolution,	its	rescue	is	relatively	easy.	The
strong,	central	nine	in	the	second	place	comes	to	its	aid,	and	the	six	submits	and	joins	with	it	in	service	to
the	ruler	in	the	fifth	place.



Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	At	the	dissolution
He	hurries	to	that	which	supports	him.
Remorse	disappears.
b)	“At	the	dissolution,	he	hurries	to	that	which	supports	him”	and	thus	attains	what	he	wishes.

The	nuclear	trigram	Chên	means	foot	and	rapid	running.	The	support	upon	which	this	line	can	count	is
that	of	the	like-minded	strong	ruler,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	Because	the	man	represented	by	the	nine
in	the	second	place	seeks	out	the	prince	on	his	own	initiative,	 it	might	be	surmised	that	he	would	have
occasion	to	regret	it.	But	he	is	strong	and	central,	and	his	unusual	behavior	is	caused	by	the	unusual	time.
He	does	 not	 act	 from	egotistic	motives,	 but	wishes	 to	 put	 a	 stop	 to	 the	 dissolution,	 and	 this	 he	 finally
achieves	in	fellowship	with	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	He	dissolves	his	self.	No	remorse.
b)	“He	dissolves	his	self.”	His	will	is	directed	outward.

This	 is	a	weak	line	 in	a	strong	place,	hence	remorse	could	be	expected.	But	 it	 is	 the	only	 line	of	the
inner	trigram	that	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	a	line	of	the	outer	trigram.	Hence	its
will	is	directed	outward.	At	the	top	of	the	trigram	of	water,	it	is	in	direct	contact	with	the	trigram	of	wind,
hence	 the	 idea	 of	 dissolution	 in	 connection	 with	 one’s	 own	 self,	 and,	 consequently,	 the	 absence	 of
remorse.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	He	dissolves	his	bond	with	his	group.
Supreme	good	fortune.
Dispersion	leads	in	turn	to	accumulation.
This	is	something	that	ordinary	men	do	not	think	of.
b)	“He	dissolves	his	bond	with	his	group.	Supreme	good	fortune.”	His	light	is	great.

The	lower	trigram	is	to	be	regarded	as	a	transformed	K’un.	K’un	denotes	a	group	of	people.	In	that	its
middle	line	has	detached	itself	and	moved	into	the	fourth	place,	 it	has	dissolved	its	bond	with	its	group
and	dissolved	the	group,	for	its	place	is	now	taken	by	the	strong	nine	in	the	second	place.
Thus	through	dispersion	there	comes	accumulation	(nuclear	trigram	Kên,	mountain).	This	yielding	line,

the	six	in	the	fourth	place,	stands	in	the	relationship	of	receiving	to	the	ruler,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,
and	has	won	the	strong	official,	the	nine	in	the	second	place,	as	its	assistant,	so	that	accumulation	does	in
fact	follow	upon	dispersion.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	His	loud	cries	are	as	dissolving	as	sweat.
Dissolution!	A	king	abides	without	blame.
b)	“A	king	abides	without	blame.”	He	is	in	his	proper	place.

Wind	 meeting	 water	 dissolves	 it	 as	 sweat	 is	 dissolved.1	 The	 trigram	 Sun,	 wind,	 which	 reaches
everywhere,	signifies	loud	cries.	The	king	is	in	his	proper	place,	hence	without	blame.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	dissolves	his	blood.
Departing,	keeping	at	a	distance,	going	out,
Is	without	blame.
b)	“He	dissolves	his	blood.”	Thus	he	keeps	at	a	distance	from	injury.

K’an	 is	 blood.	Wind	dissolves.	 Thus	occasion	 for	bloodshed	 is	 removed.	Not	 only	does	 the	 line	 itself
surmount	the	peril,	but	it	also	helps	the	six	in	the	third	place,	to	which	it	is	related.



60.	Chieh	/	Limitation

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	Only	a	man	who	is	honored,	and	who	possesses
the	necessary	spiritual	power	for	the	task,	can	establish	measure	and	mean	for	holding	the	world	within
bounds.	Hence	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:	“In	the	appropriate	place,	in	order	to	limit;
central	and	correct,	in	order	to	unite.”

The	Sequence
Things	cannot	be	forever	separate.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	LIMITATION.
Miscellaneous	Notes
LIMITATION	means	stopping.

This	hexagram	is	the	inverse	of	the	preceding	one,	but	the	inner	structure	and	the	interrelationships	of
the	nuclear	trigrams	are	the	same	in	both.	Here	water	is	held	together	by	the	lake,	while	in	the	preceding
hexagram	water	is	dispersed	by	the	wind.

THE	JUDGMENT
LIMITATION.	Success.
Galling	limitation	must	not	be	persevered	in.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“LIMITATION.	Success.”	The	firm	and	the	yielding	are	equally	divided,	and	the	firm	have	attained

the	middle	places.
“Galling	limitation	must	not	be	persevered	in,”	because	its	way	comes	to	an	end.
Joyous	in	passing	through	danger;	in	the	appropriate	place,	in	order	to	limit;	central	and	correct,

in	order	to	unite.
Heaven	and	earth	have	their	limitations,	and	the	four	seasons	of	the	year	arise.
Where	 limitation	 is	applied	 in	 the	creation	of	 institutions,	property	 is	not	encroached	upon,	and

people	are	not	harmed.
There	are	three	yang	lines	and	three	yin	lines	symmetrically	distributed—first	two	yang	lines,	then	two

yin	 lines,	 then	one	of	each.	Hence	 there	are	strong	 lines	 in	 the	 two	central	places,	 the	second	and	 the
fifth.

To	persist	in	galling	limitation	would	lead	to	failure.	But	owing	to	the	central	and	moderate	behavior	of
the	ruler	of	the”	hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	this	danger	is	overcome.	Joyousness	is	the	attribute
of	 the	 lower	 trigram	Tui,	 and	danger	 that	 of	 the	upper	 trigram	K’an.	The	 limitation	of	 the	 ruler	 of	 the
hexagram	 is	 brought	 about	 by	 the	 two	 yin	 lines	 between	which	 it	 stands.	But	 owing	 to	 its	 central	 and
correct	position,	it	attains	an	all-pervading	influence.

Limitation—division	into	periods—is	the	means	of	dividing	time.	Thus	in	China	the	year	is	divided	into
twenty-four	chieh	ch’i,	which,	being	in	harmony	with	atmospheric	phenomena,	make	it	possible	for	man	to
arrange	his	agricultural	activities	so	that	they	harmonize	with	the	course	of	the	seasons.	The	limitation	or
suitable	 division	 of	 production	 and	 consumption	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 problems	 of	 good
government	in	ancient	China.	Fundamental	principles	pertaining	to	this	problem	are	also	indicated	in	the
present	hexagram.

THE	IMAGE
Water	over	lake:	the	image	of	LIMITATION.
Thus	the	superior	man
Creates	number	and	measure,
And	examines	the	nature	of	virtue	and	correct	conduct.

The	idea	of	number	and	measure	is	 indicated	by	the	reciprocal	relationship	between	water	and	lake.
Creating	corresponds	with	the	trigram	K’an,	and	examining,	 literally	“discussing,”	corresponds	with	the
trigram	 Tui,	 mouth.	 The	 idea	 of	 number	 and	 measure—the	 resting,	 firm—corresponds	 with	 the	 upper
nuclear	 trigram	 Kên.	 The	 idea	 of	 virtue	 and	 conduct—the	 mobile,	 active—corresponds	 with	 the	 lower
nuclear	trigram	Chên.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Not	going	out	of	the	door	and	the	courtyard
Is	without	blame.
b)	“Not	going	out	of	the	door	and	the	courtyard”	is	a	sign	that	one	knows	what	is	open	and	what	is

closed.
This	line	stands	at	the	very	beginning.	Kên,	the	nuclear	trigram	above,	means	gate,	and	we	are	still	far

away	from	it;	we	are	not	yet	concerned	with	the	outer	double	gate,	but	only	with	the	inner	single	door.	We
see	 locked	doors	ahead	and	therefore	hold	back.	Not	going	out	of	 the	door	and	the	courtyard	 indicates
discretion,	essential	in	beginning	any	work	that	is	to	succeed.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	Not	going	out	of	the	gate	and	the	courtyard



Brings	misfortune.
b)	 “Not	 going	 out	 of	 the	 gate	 and	 the	 courtyard	 brings	 misfortune,”	 because	 one	 misses	 the

crucial	moment.
Here	the	situation	is	different.	Before	us	are	two	divided	lines	imaging	an	open	double	courtyard	gate.

It	 is	now	high	 time	 to	go	 forth	and	not	 to	hold	back	 selfishly	with	 the	hoarded	provisions	 (the	nuclear
trigram	Chên,	which	begins	with	this	line,	indicates	movement,	therefore	hesitation	brings	misfortune).

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	He	who	knows	no	limitation
Will	have	cause	to	lament.
No	blame.
b)	Lament	over	neglect	of	limitation—who	is	to	blame	for	this?

The	 six	 in	 the	 third	place	 is	weak	and	 stands	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 trigram	Tui,	 joyousness;	 it	 therefore
neglects	necessary	 limitation.	The	trigram	Tui	means	mouth,	 the	nuclear	 trigram	Chên	means	 fear,	and
K’an	means	mourning,	hence	the	idea	of	lament.	But	one	has	oneself	to	blame	for	this	result.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Contented	limitation.	Success.
b)	The	success	of	contented	limitation	comes	from	accepting	the	way	of	the	one	above.

This	correct,	yielding	line	is	in	the	relationship	of	receiving	to	the	ruler.	It	adapts	itself	contentedly	to
its	position,	hence	gains	success	by	joining	with	the	line	above,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	which	it	follows.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Sweet	limitation	brings	good	fortune.
Going	brings	esteem.
b)	The	good	fortune	of	sweet	limitation	comes	from	remaining	central	in	one’s	own	place.

The	central,	strong,	and	correct	attitude	of	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram	makes	even	holding	back	easy	for
it	(it	is	at	the	top	of	the	nuclear	trigram	Kên),	and	by	its	example	it	makes	limitation	sweet	for	the	others.
The	mountain,	Kên,	is	composed	chiefly	of	earth,	the	taste	of	which	is	sweet.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	Galling	limitation.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
Remorse	disappears.
b)	“Galling	limitation.	Perseverance	brings	misfortune.”	Its	way	comes	to	an	end.

Here	at	the	end	of	the	time	of	LIMITATION	one	should	not	attempt	forcibly	to	continue	limitation.	This
line	is	weak	and	at	the	top	of	the	trigram	K’an,	danger.	Anything	attempted	here	by	force	has	a	galling
effect	 and	 cannot	 be	 continued.	 Hence	 a	 new	 direction	 must	 be	 taken,	 and	 thereupon	 remorse	 will
disappear.



61.	Chung	Fu	/	Inner	Truth

The	 center	 of	 this	 hexagram	 is	 empty:	 this	 is	 its	 determining	 feature.	 Therefore	 the	 six	 in	 the	 third
place	and	the	six	in	the	fourth	place	are	the	constituting	rulers	of	the	hexagram.	However,	truth	depends
in	another	aspect	on	the	fact	that	the	center	has	substance;	therefore	the	nine	in	the	second	place	and	the
nine	in	the	fifth	place	are	the	governing	rulers.	Since,	furthermore,	the	basic	idea	is	that	a	whole	realm	is
transformed	by	the	strength	of	inner	truth,	the	place	of	honor	is	necessary	for	this	undertaking.	Hence	the
actual	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.

The	Sequence
Through	being	limited,	things	are	made	dependable.	Hence	there	follows	the	hexagram	of	INNER

TRUTH.
Miscellaneous	Notes
INNER	TRUTH	means	dependability.

This	hexagram,	like	the	two	that	precede	it,	has	a	closed-off	inner	structure;	it	differs	from	them	in	the
fact	that	 its	two	outermost	 lines	are	strong.	The	eldest	and	the	youngest	daughter	are	together	here	 in
their	appropriate	positions,	hence	mutual	 trust	 is	not	disturbed.	The	attributes	of	 the	 trigrams	are	well
harmonized:	 gentleness	 is	 above,	 joyousness	 below,	 and	 the	 nuclear	 trigrams	 are	 rest	 and	 movement.
Moreover,	the	entire	structure	of	the	hexagram	is	very	harmonious	and	symmetrical:	the	yielding	lines	are
within	 and	 the	 firm	without.	 These	are	 all	 highly	 favorable	 circumstances;	 therefore	 a	highly	 favorable
judgment	goes	with	the	hexagram.

THE	JUDGMENT
INNER	TRUTH.	Pigs	and	fishes.
Good	fortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
Perseverance	furthers.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
INNER	 TRUTH.	 The	 yielding	 are	 within,	 yet	 the	 strong	 hold	 the	 middle.	 Joyous	 and	 gentle:

thereby	truly	the	country	is	transformed.
“Pigs	and	fishes.	Good	fortune.”	The	power	of	trust	extends	even	to	pigs	and	fishes.
“It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.”	One	makes	use	of	the	hollow	of	a	wooden	boat.	Inner

truth,	and	perseverance	to	further	one:	thus	man	is	in	accord	with	heaven.
The	yielding	within	are	the	third	and	the	fourth	line.	The	strong	in	the	middle	in	the	two	trigrams	are

the	second	and	the	fifth	line.	The	yielding	lines	in	the	middle	of	the	hexagram	create	an	empty	space.	This
emptiness	 of	 heart,	 this	 humility,	 is	 necessary	 to	 attract	 what	 is	 good.	 However,	 central	 firmness	 and
strength	are	needed	to	assure	the	essential	trustworthiness.	Thus	the	foundation	on	which	the	hexagram
is	built	is	an	intermingling	of	yieldingness	and	strength.

Joyousness	 and	 gentleness	 are	 the	 attributes	 of	 the	 two	 primary	 trigrams:	 Tui	means	 joyousness	 in
following	 the	 good,	 and	 Sun	 means	 penetration	 into	 the	 hearts	 of	 men.	 Thus	 one	 establishes	 the
foundation	of	trust	that	is	necessary	in	transforming	a	country.

Pigs	and	fishes	are	the	 least	 intelligent	of	all	creatures.	When	even	such	creatures	are	 influenced,	 it
shows	 the	 great	 power	 of	 truth.1	Wood	 and	water,	wood	 and	 a	 hollowed	 cavity,	 are	 interpreted	 as	 the
image	of	a	boat	with	which	the	great	stream	can	be	crossed.

THE	IMAGE
Wind	over	lake:	the	image	of	INNER	TRUTH.
Thus	the	superior	man	discusses	criminal	cases
In	order	to	delay	executions.

Tui	 is	 the	 image	 of	 the	mouth—hence	 discussion.	 Sun	 is	 the	 Gentle,	 the	 hesitating—hence	 delay	 of
executions.	In	other	hexagrams,	Sun	also	means	commands.	Killing	and	judging	are	attributes	of	Tui.2

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Being	prepared	brings	good	fortune.
If	there	are	secret	designs,	it	is	disquieting.
b)	 The	 preparedness	 of	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning	 brings	 good	 fortune:	 the	 will	 has	 not	 yet

changed.
The	character	translated	as	“prepared”	originally	meant	the	sacrifice	offered	on	the	day	after	a	funeral,

and	from	this	it	acquires	the	meaning	of	preparation.	The	character	yen,	“quiet”	(in	“disquieting”),	really
means	the	swallow,	but	from	ancient	times	on	it	has	also	been	used	in	combinations	in	the	sense	of	an,
“quiet.”	This	line	is	strong	and	dependable,	inwardly	serene	and	prepared.	Its	will	is	not	influenced	from
without.	Secret	designs	are	suggested	by	its	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	six	in	the	fourth	place.
But	in	the	hexagram	of	INNER	TRUTH	no	secret	exclusive	relationships	should	occur.

Nine	in	the	second	place:



	
a)	A	crane	calling	in	the	shade.
Its	young	answers	it.
I	have	a	good	goblet.
I	will	share	it	with	you.
b)	“Its	young	answers	it”:	this	is	the	affection	of	the	inmost	heart.

The	crane	is	a	 lake	bird	whose	cry	 is	heard	in	the	autumn.	Tui	means	lake	and	autumn.	The	nuclear
trigram	 Chên	 denotes	 inclination	 to	 call,	 hence	 the	 image	 of	 a	 calling	 crane.	 It	 is	 under	 the	 nuclear
trigram	Kên,	mountain,	in	the	shadow	of	two	yin	lines,	in	the	middle	of	Tui,	the	lake,	hence	“in	the	shade.”
Its	 son	 is	 the	 nine	 at	 the	 beginning,	 which	 is	 of	 like	 kind	 and	 belongs	 to	 the	 same	 body	 (the	 lower
trigram).	 According	 to	 another	 interpretation,	 its	 relationship	 is	 with	 the	 nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place.	 This
suggestion—of	influence	at	a	distance—gains	added	weight	from	the	explanation	given	by	Confucius	(cf.
here–here).	Goblet	and	drinking	are	derived	from	Tui,	mouth.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	He	finds	a	comrade.
Now	he	beats	the	drum,	now	he	stops.
Now	he	sobs,	now	he	sings.
b)	“Now	he	beats	the	drum,	now	he	stops.”	The	place	is	not	appropriate.

A	yielding	line	in	a	firm	place	at	the	high	point	of	joyousness	suggests	a	lack	of	self-control.	The	line	is
attracted	by	the	nine	at	the	top	but	finds	no	footing	there,	because	attractions	are	contrary	to	the	spirit	of
the	hexagram.	It	also	fails	to	attach	itself	to	the	neighboring	six	in	the	fourth	place	(no	doubt	the	comrade
referred	to),	which	is	of	like	kind.

Drumming	 in	 ancient	 China	 was	 the	 signal	 for	 advance;	 a	 retreat,	 or	 cessation	 of	 an	 attack,	 was
indicated	by	the	striking	of	a	metal	gong.	This	line	stands	in	the	two	nuclear	trigrams	Chên	(the	Arousing)
and	Kên	(Keeping	Still).	The	alternation	of	sobbing	and	laughing	is	derived	from	the	primary	trigram	Tui
and	the	nuclear	trigram	Chên.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	moon	nearly	at	the	full.
The	team	horse	goes	astray.
No	blame.
b)	“The	team	horse	goes	astray.”	It	separates	from	its	kind	and	turns	upward.

The	 team	 horse	 is	 the	 six	 in	 the	 third	 place.	 But	 the	 fact	 that	 there	 is	 similarity	 in	 kind	 has	 no
determining	 effect.	 The	 line	 is	 correct	 in	 its	 place	 and	 has	 a	 receiving	 relationship	 to	 the	 ruler	 of	 the
hexagram,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place,	whom	it	serves	as	minister.	Hence	the	turning	away	from	its	mate	of
like	kind	toward	what	is	above.

Nine	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	He	possesses	truth,	which	links	together.
No	blame.
b)	“He	possesses	truth,	which	links	together.”	The	place	is	correct	and	appropriate.

The	image	of	linking	together	derives	from	the	meaning	of	the	upper	trigram	Sun,	rope,	and	that	of	the
upper	nuclear	trigram	Kên,	hand.	For	the	rest,	the	influence	of	this	line	as	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	shown
by	the	correct,	central,	and	honored	position	it	occupies.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	Cockcrow	penetrating	to	heaven.
Perseverance	brings	misfortune.
b)	“Cockcrow	penetrating	to	heaven.”	How	could	such	a	one	last	long?

The	cock	is	associated	with	the	trigram	Sun.	It	wants	to	fly	to	heaven,	but	that	it	cannot	do.	Hence	only
the	 cry	 issues	 forth	 (Sun	means	 a	 shouting	 that	 penetrates	 everywhere,	 like	 the	wind).	 This	means	 an
exaggeration:	the	expression	is	stronger	than	the	feeling.	It	creates	false	pathos,	because	it	is	not	to	be
reconciled	 with	 inner	 truth.	 In	 the	 long	 run	 misfortune	 results.	 The	 line	 is	 too	 strong	 in	 its	 exposed
position	and	is	therefore	no	longer	carried	by	the	strength	of	the	hexagram,	hence	this	misfortune.



62.	Hsiao	Kuo	/	Preponderance	of	the	Small

The	rulers	of	the	hexagram	are	the	second	and	the	fifth	 line,	because	they	are	yielding	and	hold	the
middle.	They	are	in	a	time	when	a	transition	must	be	made,	but	without	going	too	far.

The	Sequence
When	one	has	the	trust	of	creatures,	one	sets	them	in	motion;	hence	there	follows	the	hexagram

of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.
Miscellaneous	Notes
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL	signifies	a	transition.
Appended	Judgments
The	rulers	split	wood	and	made	a	pestle	of	it.	They	made	a	hollow	in	the	ground	for	a	mortar.	The

use	of	the	mortar	and	pestle	was	of	benefit	to	all	mankind.	They	probably	took	this	from	the	hexagram
of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.
The	Chinese	word	kuo	cannot	be	translated	in	such	a	way	as	to	render	all	its	secondary	meanings.	It

means	to	pass	by,	and	then	comes	the	idea	of	excessiveness,	preponderance;	in	fact,	it	means	everything
that	 results	 from	 exceeding	 the	 mean.	 The	 hexagram	 deals	 with	 transitional	 states,	 extraordinary
conditions.	 It	 is	 so	 constructed	 that	 the	 yielding	 elements	 are	 on	 the	 outside.	 When,	 given	 such	 a
structure,	strong	lines	predominate,	the	hexagram	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	(28)	results;	but
when	 the	 weak	 lines	 are	 in	 the	 majority,	 we	 have	 PREPONDERANCE	 OF	 THE	 SMALL.	 The	 nuclear
trigrams	of	the	present	hexagram	produce	the	same	structure	as	the	primary	trigrams	of	hexagram	28.
This	hexagram	is	the	opposite	of	the	preceding	one.

THE	JUDGMENT
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.	Success.
Perseverance	furthers.
Small	things	may	be	done;	great	things	should	not	be	done.
The	flying	bird	brings	the	message:
It	is	not	well	to	strive	upward,
It	is	well	to	remain	below.
Great	good	fortune.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.	The	small	preponderate	and	have	success.	To	be	furthered	in

transition	by	perseverance:	this	means	going	with	the	time.
The	yielding	attains	the	middle,	hence	good	fortune	in	small	things.
The	hard	has	lost	its	place	and	is	not	in	the	middle:	hence	one	should	not	do	great	things.
The	hexagram	has	the	form	of	a	flying	bird.
“The	 flying	bird	brings	 the	message:	 It	 is	 not	well	 to	 strive	upward,	 it	 is	well	 to	 remain	below.

Great	good	fortune.”	Striving	upward	is	rebellion,	striving	downward	is	devotion.
In	exceptional	times	exceptional	measures	are	necessary	for	reestablishing	the	norm.	The	point	here	is

that	the	time	demands	a	restraint	that	would	appear	to	be	excessive.	It	is	a	time	like	that	of	King	Wên	and
the	tyrant	Chou	Hsin,	and	this	restraint,	which	might	appear	exaggerated,	is	exactly	what	the	time	calls
for.	 Preponderance	 of	 the	 small	 is	 indicated	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 yielding,	 i.e.,	 small	 lines	 hold	 the	middle
places	and	thus	are	rulers	of	the	hexagram,	while	the	strong	lines	have	been	forced	out	of	key	positions
outside	into	places	inside,	without	being	central.
PREPONDERANCE	OF	 THE	GREAT	 is	 like	 a	 beam;	 its	 danger	 lies	 in	 excessive	weight,	 therefore	 it

must	be	supported	in	the	middle	from	below.	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL	is	like	a	bird;	the	danger
for	it	lies	in	mounting	too	high	and	losing	the	ground	under	its	feet.

THE	IMAGE
Thunder	on	the	mountain:
The	image	of	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	SMALL.
Thus	in	his	conduct	the	superior	man	gives	preponderance	to	reverence.
In	bereavement	he	gives	preponderance	to	grief.
In	his	expenditures	he	gives	preponderance	to	thrift.

Thunder	rising	from	the	plain	to	the	heights	becomes	gradually	fainter	in	transition.	From	this	is	taken
the	idea	of	overweighting,	of	doing	a	little	too	much	in	the	right	way.	For	it	is	precisely	by	doing	a	little	too
much	in	the	direction	of	the	small	that	we	hit	the	mark	as	to	what	is	right.	It	 is	thus	that	we	attain	the
right	degree	of	reverence	in	our	conduct,	the	right	degree	of	mourning	at	a	burial,	and	the	right	degree	of
economy	in	expenditures.	Conduct	is	suggested	by	the	upper	trigram	Chên,	movement,	and	burial	by	the
position	 of	 the	 nuclear	 trigrams—Tui,	 the	 lake,	 over	Sun,	wood	 (cf.	 hexagram	28,	 in	which	 the	 idea	 of
burial	 is	 likewise	represented	by	 this	combination).	Thrift	 in	spending	 is	suggested	by	 the	 trigram	Kên,
mountain,	which	indicates	limitation.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	



a)	The	bird	meets	with	misfortune	through	flying.
b)	“The	bird	meets	with	misfortune	through	flying.”	Here	there	is	nothing	to	be	done.

This	line	is	in	the	lowest	place	in	the	trigram	Kên,	mountain.	It	ought	to	keep	still,	but	since	according
to	the	meaning	of	the	hexagram,	the	weak	preponderates,	and	since	there	is	a	secret	relationship	between
it	and	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place,	it	will	not	suffer	restraint,	but	seeks	to	soar	like	a	flying	bird.	But	in
doing	so	it	willfully	endangers	itself;	for	if	a	bird	flies	up	when	it	is	time	for	it	to	keep	still,	it	is	sure	to	fall
into	the	hands	of	the	hunter.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	She	passes	by	her	ancestor
And	meets	her	ancestress.
He	does	not	reach	his	prince
And	meets	the	official.
No	blame.
b)	“He	does	not	reach	his	prince.”	The	official	should	not	wish	to	surpass	(the	prince).

The	nine	in	the	third	place	is	the	father,	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	the	grandfather,	the	six	in	the	fifth
place	the	grandmother.	Congruity	relates	the	present	 line	to	the	six	 in	the	 fifth	place.	But	because	 it	 is
presupposed	in	this	hexagram	that	the	small	passes	by	and	surmounts	the	great,	and	because	furthermore
the	six	in	the	fifth	place	is	the	ruler	of	the	hexagram,	the	image	of	the	ancestress	is	chosen.	In	another
aspect,	the	present	line	represents	an	official	who	does	not	surpass	the	yielding	prince,	the	six	in	the	fifth
place,	because	he	himself	is	yielding	in	nature.	In	the	nine	in	the	third	place	he	meets	with	an	official	with
whom	he	is	united	through	the	relationship	of	holding	together.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	If	one	is	not	extremely	careful,
Somebody	may	come	up	from	behind	and	strike	him.
Misfortune.
b)	“Somebody	may	come	up	from	behind	and	strike	him.”	What	a	misfortune	this	is!

This	line	is	strong,	it	is	true,	but	the	six	in	the	second	place	is	in	a	more	favorable	position,	because	it	is
not	 only	 central	 but	 also	 a	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram.	 The	 nine	 in	 the	 third	 place,	 being	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the
primary	trigram	Kên,	can	guard	itself	against	unexpected	accidents.	If	 it	 fails	to	do	this,	disaster	comes
from	behind.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	No	blame.	He	meets	him	without	passing	by.
Going	brings	danger.	One	must	be	on	guard.
Do	not	act.	Be	constantly	persevering.
b)	“He	meets	him	without	passing	by.”	The	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.
“Going	brings	danger.	One	must	be	on	guard.”	One	must	on	no	account	continue	thus.

The	strength	of	the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	is	modified	by	the	weakness	of	the	place.	It	is	the	place	of
the	minister.	He	does	not	seek	to	surpass	his	prince	but	meets	him,	so	that	all	is	well.	However,	as	ruler	of
the	upper	trigram	Chên,	the	line	is	too	readily	inclined	to	be	drawn	into	excessive	movement,	which	would
be	dangerous.	Hence	the	warning	against	action.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Dense	clouds,
No	rain	from	our	western	territory.
The	prince	shoots	and	hits	him	who	is	in	the	cave.
b)	“Dense	clouds,	no	rain”:	he	is	already	above.

The	oracle,	“Dense	clouds,	no	rain,”	appears	also	in	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL	(9),	which
deals	with	a	somewhat	similar	situation.	There,	however,	it	is	the	strong	lines	at	the	top	that	finally	cause
the	clouds	to	condense	to	rain.	Here,	where	the	small	passes	by	the	great,	the	six	in	the	fifth	place	is	too
high	up.	There	 is	no	 strong	 line	above	 it	 that	 could	condense	 the	clouds.	The	upper	 trigram	Tui	 is	 the
west.	It	also	means	metal,	hence	the	image	of	shooting.	The	man	in	the	cave	is	the	six	in	the	second	place.
The	word	for	shooting	means	shooting	with	an	arrow	attached	to	a	line	for	the	purpose	of	dragging	in	the
game	 that	 has	 been	 shot.	 The	 connection	 arises	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 present	 line	 and	 the	 six	 in	 the
second	place	are	related	through	similarity	of	kind.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	passes	him	by,	not	meeting	him.
The	flying	bird	leaves	him.
Misfortune.
This	means	bad	luck	and	injury.
b)	“He	passes	him	by,	not	meeting	him.”	He	is	already	arrogant.

The	six	at	the	top	really	stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	nine	in	the	third	place,	but
at	 a	 time	 when	 the	 small	 passes	 by	 the	 great,	 this	 relationship	 does	 not	 apply.	 The	 six	 at	 the	 top	 is
directed	upward	only.	Thus	the	image	of	the	bird	appears	again.	In	the	case	of	the	six	at	the	beginning,
disaster	results	from	impatience;	here	it	comes	from	the	fact	that	the	line	is	too	high,	too	arrogant,	and
unwilling	to	come	back.	As	a	result,	it	loses	its	way,	leaves	the	others,	and	draws	disaster	upon	itself	from



both	gods	and	men.



63.	Chi	Chi	/	After	Completion

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	second	place.	The	hexagram	of	AFTER	COMPLETION	means
that	 at	 first	 good	 fortune	 prevails	 and	 in	 the	 end	 disorder.	 The	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place	 is	 in	 the	 inner
trigram	just	at	the	time	when	good	fortune	begins.	Therefore	it	is	said	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision:
“	‘At	the	beginning	good	fortune’;	the	yielding	has	attained	the	middle.”

The	Sequence
He	who	 stands	 above	 things	 brings	 them	 to	 completion.	 Hence	 there	 follows	 the	 hexagram	 of

AFTER	COMPLETION.
Miscellaneous	Notes
AFTER	COMPLETION	means	making	firm.

This	hexagram	is	the	only	one	in	which	all	the	lines	stand	in	their	proper	places.	It	is	the	hexagram	of
transition	 from	 T’ai,	 PEACE	 (11)	 to	 P’i,	 STANDSTILL	 (12).	 It	 contains	 the	 two	 primary	 trigrams	 K’an,
water,	 and	 Li,	 fire,	 which	 likewise,	 in	 the	 reverse	 order,	 constitute	 its	 nuclear	 trigrams.	 K’an	 strives
downward	and	Li	upward;	hence	the	outer	and	the	inner	organization	of	the	hexagram	create	a	state	of
equilibrium	that	is	obviously	unstable.

THE	JUDGMENT
AFTER	COMPLETION.	Success	in	small	matters.
Perseverance	furthers.
At	the	beginning	good	fortune,
At	the	end	disorder.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“AFTER	COMPLETION.	Success.”	In	small	matters	there	is	success.
“Perseverance	 furthers.”	 The	 firm	 and	 the	 yielding	 are	 correct,	 and	 their	 places	 are	 the

appropriate	ones.
“At	the	beginning	good	fortune”:	the	yielding	has	attained	the	middle.
If	one	stands	still	at	the	end,	disorders	arise,	because	the	way	comes	to	an	end.

The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram	 is	 the	 six	 in	 the	 second	 place;	 although	weak,	 it	 has	 success	 because	 it
stands	in	the	relationship	of	correspondence	to	the	strong	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	Perseverance	furthers
because	all	the	lines	are	in	their	appropriate	places,	and	therefore	any	deviation	brings	misfortune.	At	the
beginning	all	goes	well,	because	the	yielding	six	in	the	second	place	occupies	the	middle	in	the	trigram	Li,
clarity.	 It	 is	a	 time	of	very	great	cultural	development	and	refinement.	But	when	no	 further	progress	 is
possible,	disorder	necessarily	arises,	because	the	way	cannot	go	on.

THE	IMAGE
Water	over	fire:	the	image	of	the	condition
In	AFTER	COMPLETION.
Thus	the	superior	man
Takes	thought	of	misfortune
And	arms	himself	against	it	in	advance.

In	 one	 aspect,	 fire	 and	water	 counteract	 each	 other,	whereby	 an	 equilibrium	 is	 created;	 in	 another
aspect,	however,	 fear	of	a	collapse	 is	also	suggested.	 If	 the	water	escapes,	 the	 fire	goes	out;	 if	 the	 fire
flames	high,	the	water	dries	up.	Hence	precautionary	measures	are	necessary.	The	trigram	K’an	suggests
danger	and	disaster,	Li	suggests	clarity,	foresight.	The	taking	thought	occurs	in	the	heart,	the	arming	in
external	actions.	The	danger	still	 lurks	unseen,	hence	only	reflection	enables	one	 to	perceive	 it	 in	 time
and	thus	avert	it.

THE	LINES
Nine	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	Nine	at	the	beginning	means:
He	brakes	his	wheels.
He	gets	his	tail	in	the	water.
No	blame.
b)	“He	brakes	his	wheels.”	According	to	the	meaning,	there	is	no	blame	in	this.

K’an	denotes	wheel,	fox,	hindering.	The	first	line	is	at	the	rear	of	the	fox,	hence	the	tail.	Because	it	has
a	connection	with	the	lowest	line	of	the	upper	primary	trigram,	K’an,	it	gets	wet.	Since	the	lower	nuclear
trigram	 is	 likewise	 K’an,	 the	 symbols	 of	 the	 fox	 and	 the	wheel	 occur	 here	 at	 the	 very	 beginning.	 The
possibility	of	overcoming	the	danger	by	holding	back	firmly	arises	from	the	strong	nature	of	the	line.

Six	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	The	woman	loses	the	curtain	of	her	carriage.
Do	not	run	after	it;
On	the	seventh	day	you	will	get	it.
b)	“On	the	seventh	day	you	will	get	it,”	as	a	result	of	the	middle	way.



The	primary	trigram	Li,	in	which	this	is	the	middle	line,	is	the	middle	daughter,	hence	a	woman	as	the
symbol.	 The	 same	 idea	 is	 suggested	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 line	 is	 yielding	 and	 in	 the	 relationship	 of
correspondence	to	the	husband,	the	nine	in	the	fifth	place.	K’an	means	wagon,	Li	means	curtain.	K’an	also
means	robbers,	hence	the	theft	of	the	curtain.	“After	seven	days”	means	the	complete	cycle	of	change	in
the	six	 lines	of	 the	hexagram;	at	 the	seventh	change	 the	starting	point	 recurs.	The	 line	 is	 yielding	and
stands	between	two	strong	lines;	it	can	be	compared	to	a	woman	who	has	lost	her	veil	and	is	consequently
exposed	 to	 attack.	 But	 since	 she	 is	 correct,	 these	 attacks	 do	 her	 no	 harm.	 She	 remains	 true	 to	 her
husband	and	also	obtains	her	veil	again.

Nine	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	The	Illustrious	Ancestor
Disciplines	the	Devil’s	Country.
After	three	years	he	conquers	it.
Inferior	people	must	not	be	employed.
b)	“After	three	years	he	conquers	it.”	This	is	exhausting.

Li	means	weapons.	The	Devil’s	Country	is	the	territory	of	the	Huns	in	the	north.	North	is	the	direction
of	K’an.	This	line	is	in	the	middle	of	the	nuclear	trigram	K’an.	It	 is	a	strong	line	in	a	strong	place.	“The
Illustrious	Ancestor”	 is	 the	 dynastic	 title	 of	Wu	Ting,	 the	 emperor	who	 gave	 a	 new	 impetus	 to	 the	 Yin
dynasty.	The	warning	against	employing	inferior	people	is	suggested	by	the	secret	relation	of	this	line	to
the	weak	six	at	the	top.

Six	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	The	finest	clothes	turn	to	rags.
Be	careful	all	day	long.
b)	“Be	careful	all	day	long.”	There	is	cause	for	doubt.

This	is	a	yielding	line	in	a	yielding	place	at	the	beginning	of	danger.	Hence	the	warning	that	even	the
finest	clothes	turn	to	rags.	Cause	for	doubt	comes	from	the	trigram	K’an,	danger,	which	we	enter	here.
Chêng	Tzu	gives	another	explanation.	He	employs	 the	 image	of	a	boat,	and	says:	 “It	has	a	 leak,	but

there	are	rags	for	plugging	it	up.”
Nine	in	the	fifth	place:

	
a)	The	neighbor	in	the	east	who	slaughters	an	ox
Does	not	attain	as	much	real	happiness
As	the	neighbor	in	the	west
With	his	small	offering.
b)	The	eastern	neighbor,	who	slaughters	an	ox,	 is	not	as	much	 in	harmony	with	the	time	as	the

western	neighbor.	The	latter	attains	true	happiness:	good	fortune	comes	in	great	measure.
Li	is	the	ox.	K’an	represents	the	pig	slaughtered	in	the	small	sacrifice.	The	second	line,	which	is	in	the

nuclear	trigram	K’an,	is	the	western	neighbor,	because	in	the	Sequence	of	Earlier	Heaven,	K’an	is	placed
in	the	west.	The	fourth	line,	which	is	in	the	nuclear	trigram	Li,	is	the	eastern	neighbor,	because	Li	stands
opposite	 to	K’an.	 The	nine	 in	 the	 fifth	 place	presides	 over	 the	 sacrifice.	 The	 six	 in	 the	 second	place	 is
central;	 it	 brings	 the	 intrinsically	 lesser	 offering	 of	 a	 pig	 at	 the	 right	 time	 and	 therefore	 has	 greater
happiness	than	the	six	in	the	fourth	place,	which,	though	it	brings	the	relatively	greater	offering	of	an	ox,
is	not	central.

Six	at	the	top:
	

a)	He	gets	his	head	in	the	water.	Danger.
b)	“He	gets	his	head	in	the	water.”	How	can	one	endure	this	for	long?

While	the	nine	at	the	beginning	is	the	tail	of	the	fox,	the	six	at	the	top	is	its	head.	It	gets	into	the	water
because	it	is	a	weak	line	at	the	top	of	K’an,	water,	danger.	While	crossing	the	water	it	turns	back	and	so
incurs	the	danger	of	drowning.	These	are	the	disorders	prophesied	by	the	hexagram	as	the	final	outcome.



64.	Wei	Chi	/	Before	Completion

The	ruler	of	the	hexagram	is	the	six	in	the	fifth	place,	because	BEFORE	COMPLETION	implies	a	time
in	which	at	first	disorder	prevails,	then	finally	order.	The	six	in	the	fifth	place	is	in	the	outer	trigram	and
initiates	 the	 time	 of	 order.	 Therefore	 it	 is	 said	 in	 the	 Commentary	 on	 the	 Decision:	 “	 ‘BEFORE
COMPLETION.	Success.’	For	the	yielding	attains	the	middle.”

The	Sequence
Things	 cannot	 exhaust	 themselves.	 Hence	 there	 follows,	 at	 the	 end,	 the	 hexagram	 of	 BEFORE

COMPLETION.
Miscellaneous	Notes
BEFORE	COMPLETION	is	the	exhaustion	of	the	masculine.

This	 hexagram	 is	 at	 once	 the	 inverse	 and	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 preceding	 one.	 K’an	 and	 Li,	 both	 as
nuclear	 and	 as	 primary	 trigrams,	 have	 changed	 places.	 The	 hexagram	 depicts	 the	 transition	 from	 P’i,
STANDSTILL	(12)	to	T’ai,	PEACE	(11).	Outwardly	viewed,	none	of	the	 lines	appears	 in	 its	proper	place;
but	 they	are	all	 in	relationship	to	one	another,	and	order	stands	preformed	within,	despite	 the	outward
appearance	of	complete	disorder.	The	strong	middle	line	has	come	down	from	the	fifth	place	to	the	second
and	has	 thus	established	a	connection.	 It	 is	 true	 that	K’un	 is	not	yet	above	nor	Ch’ien	below,	as	 in	 the
hexagram	T’ai,	but	their	representatives,	Li	and	K’an,	are	in	these	positions.	Li	and	K’an	represent	K’un
and	Ch’ien	 in	 spirit	 and	 influence	 (because	 of	 their	 respective	middle	 lines).	 In	 the	 phenomenal	world
(Sequence	of	Later	Heaven)	they	are	the	representatives	of	K’un	and	Ch’ien,	and	stand	in	the	regions	of
the	latter—Li	in	the	south	and	K’an	in	the	north.

THE	JUDGMENT
BEFORE	COMPLETION.	Success.
But	if	the	little	fox,	after	nearly	completing	the	crossing,
Gets	his	tail	in	the	water,
There	is	nothing	that	would	further.
Commentary	on	the	Decision
“BEFORE	COMPLETION.	Success.”	For	the	yielding	attains	the	middle.

“The	little	fox	has	nearly	completed	the	crossing”:	he	is	not	yet	past	the	middle.
“He	gets	his	tail	in	the	water.	There	is	nothing	that	would	further.”	Because	the	matter	does	not	go	on

to	the	end.
Although	 the	 lines	 are	 not	 in	 their	 appropriate	 places,	 the	 firm	 and	 the	 yielding	 nevertheless

correspond.
K’an	has	the	fox	as	its	symbol,	and	also	denotes	water.	There	is	hope	of	success	because	the	firm	and

the	 weak	 lines	 all	 correspond.	 The	 ruler	 of	 the	 hexagram,	 the	 six	 in	 the	 fifth	 place,	 has	 reached	 the
middle,	and	this	insures	the	right	attitude	for	bringing	about	completion.	The	nine	in	the	second	place,	on
the	other	hand,	has	not	yet	passed	the	middle,	and	in	its	case	this	is	dangerous.	It	is	a	strong	line	hemmed
in	between	two	yin	lines.	Like	the	incautious	young	fox	that	runs	rashly	over	the	ice,	it	relies	too	much	on
its	strength.	Therefore	it	gets	its	tail	wet;	the	crossing	does	not	succeed.

THE	IMAGE
Fire	over	water:
The	image	of	the	condition	before	transition.
Thus	the	superior	man	is	careful
In	the	differentiation	of	things,
So	that	each	finds	its	place.

Fire	 flares	upward,	water	 flows	downward;	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 completion.	 If	 one	were	 to	 attempt	 to
force	 completion,	 harm	would	 result.	 Therefore	 one	must	 separate	 things	 in	 order	 to	 unite	 them.	One
must	put	them	into	their	places	as	carefully	as	one	handles	fire	and	water,	so	that	they	do	not	combat	one
another.

THE	LINES
Six	at	the	beginning:

	
a)	He	gets	his	tail	in	the	water.
Humiliating.
b)	“He	gets	his	tail	in	the	water.”	For	he	cannot	take	the	end	into	view.

Here	 we	 have	 the	 same	 images	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 hexagram,	 though	 somewhat	 differently
distributed.	The	first	 line	 is	the	tail.	 It.is	weak	and	stands	at	the	bottom	in	a	dangerous	position,	hence
does	not	perceive	the	consequences	of	its	actions.	It	rashly	tries	to	cross	and	fails.

Nine	in	the	second	place:
	

a)	He	brakes	his	wheels.
Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.



b)	The	nine	in	the	second	place	has	good	fortune	if	it	is	persevering.	It	is	central	and	hence	acts
correctly.
Here	the	image	of	the	wheel	and	of	braking,	which	in	the	preceding	hexagram	is	associated	with	the

first	line	in	virtue	of	its	strength,	is	transferred	to	the	strong	second	line.	The	strength	and	correctness	of
the	latter	make	the	outlook	favorable.

Six	in	the	third	place:
	

a)	Before	completion,	attack	brings	misfortune.
It	furthers	one	to	cross	the	great	water.
b)	“Before	completion,	attack	brings	misfortune.”	The	place	is	not	the	appropriate	one.

The	 place	 is	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 lower	 primary	 trigram	 K’an,	 danger,	 so	 that	 completion	 would	 be
possible.	But	since	the	line	is	too	weak	for	this	decisive	position,	and	since	it	stands	at	the	beginning	of
the	nuclear	trigram	K’an,	a	new	danger	arises.	One	should	not	attempt	to	force	completion	but	should	try
to	get	 clear	 of	 the	whole	 situation.	A	 change	of	 character	 is	 necessary.	Owing	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 line
changes	from	a	six	into	a	nine,	the	trigram	Sun	develops	below;	this,	together	with	the	primary	trigram
K’an,	results	in	the	image	of	a	boat	over	water,	hence	the	crossing	of	the	great	water.

Nine	in	the	fourth	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
Remorse	disappears.
Shock,	thus	to	discipline	the	Devil’s	Country.
For	three	years,	great	realms	are	awarded.
b)	“Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.	Remorse	disappears.”	What	is	willed	is	done.

As	 this	 hexagram	 is	 the	 inverse	 of	 the	 preceding	 one,	 the	 disciplining	 of	 the	Devil’s	 Country,	 there
mentioned	in	connection	with	the	third	place,	appears	here	in	connection	with	the	fourth.	Here	the	result
is	more	favorable—there	three	years	of	fighting,	here	three	years	of	rewards.	The	present	line	is	a	strong
official	who	assists	the	gentle	ruler	in	the	fifth	place	and	therefore	carries	out	his	will.

Six	in	the	fifth	place:
	

a)	Perseverance	brings	good	fortune.
No	remorse.
The	light	of	the	superior	man	is	true.
Good	fortune.
b)	“The	light	of	the	superior	man	is	true.”	His	light	brings	good	fortune.

This	line	is	in	the	middle	of	the	trigram	Li,	light,	hence	everything	is	favorable	for	accomplishing	the
transition	to	a	new	period.

Nine	at	the	top:
	

a)	There	is	drinking	of	wine
In	genuine	confidence.	No	blame.
But	if	one	wets	his	head,
He	loses	it,	in	truth.
b)	When	one	wets	his	head	while	drinking	wine,	it	is	because	he	knows	no	moderation.

The	top	line	 is	strong	and	inherently	favorable.	The	image	of	wine	comes	from	the	trigram	K’an;	the
present	line	is	in	relationship	with	the	top	line	of	K’an.	As	in	the	preceding	hexagram,	the	image	of	a	head
—wetting	occurs.	But	here	it	is	only	a	possibility,	an	avoidable	danger.
Thus	 at	 its	 close	 the	 Book	 of	 Changes	 leaves	 the	 situation	 open	 for	 new	 beginnings	 and	 new

formations.	 The	 same	 idea	 indeed	 finds	 expression	 in	 the	 Tsa	 Kua,	 Miscellaneous	 Notes	 on	 the
Hexagrams,	in	which	Kuai,	BREAK-THROUGH	(43),	is	placed	at	the	end,	with	these	closing	words:

BREAK-THROUGH	means	resoluteness.	The	strong	turns	resolutely	against	the	weak.	The	way	of
the	superior	man	is	in	the	ascendant,	the	way	of	the	inferior	man	leads	to	grief.



APPENDIXES



I.	On	Consulting	the	Oracle
1.	THE	YARROW-STALK	ORACLE

The	oracle	is	consulted	with	the	help	of	yarrow	stalks.	Fifty	stalks	are	used	for	this	purpose.	One	is	put
aside	 and	 plays	 no	 further	 part.	 The	 remaining	 49	 stalks	 are	 first	 divided	 into	 two	 heaps	 [at	 random].
Thereupon	 one	 stalk	 is	 taken	 from	 the	 right-hand	 heap	 and	 put	 between	 the	 ring	 finger	 and	 the	 little
finger	of	the	left	hand.	Then	the	left-hand	heap	is	placed	in	the	left	hand,	and	the	right	hand	takes	from	it
bundles	of	4,	until	there	are	4	or	fewer	stalks	remaining.	This	remainder	is	placed	between	the	ring	finger
and	the	middle	finger	of	the	left	hand.	Next	the	right-hand	heap	is	counted	off	by	fours,	and	the	remainder
is	 placed	 between	 the	 middle	 finger	 and	 the	 forefinger	 of	 the	 left	 hand.	 The	 sum	 of	 the	 stalks	 now
between	the	fingers	of	the	left	hand	is	either	9	or	5.	(The	various	possibilities	are	1	+	4	+	4,	or	1	+	3	+	1,
or	1	+	2	+	2,	or	1	+	1	+	3;	it	follows	that	the	number	5	is	easier	to	obtain	than	the	number	9.)	At	this	first
counting	off	of	the	stalks,	the	first	stalk—held	between	the	little	finger	and	the	ring	finger—is	disregarded
as	supernumerary,	hence	one	reckons	as	follows:	9	=	8,	or	5	=	4.	The	number	4	is	regarded	as	a	complete
unit,	to	which	the	numerical	value	3	is	assigned.	The	number	8,	on	the	other	hand,	is	regarded	as	a	double
unit	and	is	reckoned	as	having	only	the	numerical	value	2.,	Therefore,	if	at	the	first	count	9	stalks	are	left
over,	they	count	as	2;	if	5	are	left,	they	count	as	3.	These	stalks	are	now	laid	aside	for	the	time	being.

Then	the	remaining	stalks	are	gathered	together	again	and	divided	anew.	Once	more	one	takes	a	stalk
from	the	pile	on	the	right	and	places	it	between	the	ring	finger	and	the	little	finger	of	the	left	hand;	then
one	 counts	 off	 the	 stalks	 as	 before.	 This	 time	 the	 sum	of	 the	 remainders	 is	 either	 8	 or	 4,	 the	 possible
combinations	being	1	+	4	+	3,	or	1	+	3	+	4,	or	1	+	1	+	2,	or	1	+	2	+	1,	so	that	this	time	the	chances	of
obtaining	8	or	4	are	equal.	The	8	counts	as	2,	the	4	counts	as	3.

The	 procedure	 is	 carried	 out	 a	 third	 time	 with	 the	 remaining	 stalks,	 and	 again	 the	 sum	 of	 the
remainders	is	8	or	4.

Now,	from	the	numerical	values	assigned	to	each	of	the	three	composite	remainders,	a	line	is	formed.
If	 the	sum	is	5	(=	4,	value	3)	+	4	(value	3)	+	4	(value	3),	 the	resulting	numerical	value	 is	9,	 the	so-

called	old	yang.	This	becomes	a	positive	line	that	moves	and	must	therefore	be	taken	into	account	in	the
interpretation	of	the	individual	lines.	It	is	designated	by	the	symbol	 	or	o.

If	the	sum	of	the	composite	remainders	is	9	(=	8,	value	2)	+	8	(value	2)	+	8	(value	2),	the	final	value	is
6,	the	so-called	old	yin.	This	becomes	a	negative	line	that	moves	and	is	therefore	to	be	taken	into	account
in	the	interpretation	of	the	individual	lines.	It	is	designated	by	the	symbol	—	X	—	or	X.

If	the	sum	is
9	(2)	+	8	(2)	+	4	(3)

or	5	(3)	+	8	(2)	+	8	(2)	=	7
or	9	(2)	+	4	(3)	+	8	(2)

the	value	7	results,	the	so-called	young	yang.	This	becomes	a	positive	line	that	is	at	rest	and	therefore
not	taken	into	account	in	the	interpretation	of	the	individual	lines.	It	is	designated	by	the	symbol	—.

If	the	sum	is
9	(2)	+	4	(3)	+	4	(3)

or	5	(3)	+	4	(3)	+	8	(2)	=	8
or	5	(3)	+	8	(2)	+	4	(3)

the	value	8	results,	the	so-called	young	yin.	This	becomes	a	negative	line	that	is	at	rest	and	therefore
not	taken	into	account	in	the	interpretation	of	the	individual	lines.	It	is	designated	by	the	symbol	—	—.

This	procedure	is	repeated	six	times,	and	thus	a	hexagram	of	six	stages	is	built	up.	When	a	hexagram
consists	 entirely	 of	 nonmoving	 lines,	 the	 oracle	 takes	 into	 account	 only	 the	 idea	 represented	 by	 the
hexagram	as	a	whole,	as	set	down	in	the	Judgment	by	King	Wên	and	in	the	Commentary	on	the	Decision
by	Confucius,	together	with	the	Image.

If	there	are	one	or	more	moving	lines	in	the	hexagram	thus	obtained,	the	words	appended	by	the	Duke
of	Chou	to	the	given	line	or	lines	are	also	to	be	considered.	His	words	therefore	carry	the	superscription,
“Nine	in	the	xth	place,”	or	“Six	in	the	xth	place.”

Furthermore,	the	movement,	i.e.,	change1	 in	the	lines,	gives	rise	to	a	new	hexagram,	the	meaning	of
which	must	also	be	taken	into	account.	For	instance,	when	we	get	hexagram	56

showing	a	moving	line	in	the	fourth	place

we	must	take	into	account	not	only	the	text2	and	the	Image	belonging	to	this	hexagram	as	a	whole,	but
also	 the	 text	 that	 goes	with	 the	 fourth	 line,	 and	 in	 addition	 both	 the	 text	 and	 the	 Image	 belonging	 to
hexagram	52:

Thus	hexagram	56	would	be	the	starting	point	of	a	development	leading,	by	reason	of	the	situation	of
the	nine	in	the	fourth	place	and	the	appended	counsel,	to	the	final	situation,	i.e.,	hexagram	52.

In	the	second	hexagram	the	text	belonging	to	the	moving	line	is	disregarded.



2.	THE	COIN	ORACLE
In	addition	to	the	method	of	the	yarrow-stalk	oracle,	there	is	in	use	a	shorter	method	employing	coins:

for	this	as	a	rule	old	Chinese	bronze	coins,	with	a	hole	in	the	middle	and	an	inscription	on	one	side,	are
used.	Three	coins	are	taken	up	and	thrown	down	together,	and	each	throw	gives	a	line.	The	inscribed	side
counts	 as	 yin,	 with	 the	 value	 2,	 and	 the	 reverse	 side	 counts	 as	 yang,	with	 the	 value	 3.	 From	 this	 the
character	of	the	line	is	derived.	If	all	three	coins	are	yang,	the	line	is	a	9;	if	all	three	are	yin,	it	is	a	6.

Two	yin	and	one	yang	yield	a	7,	and	two	yang	and	one	yin	yield	an	8.	In	looking	up	the	hexagrams	in
the	Book	of	Changes,	one	proceeds	as	with	the	yarrow-stalk	oracle.

There	 is	yet	another	kind	of	coin	oracle,	employing,	besides	 the	hexagrams	of	 the	 I	Ching,	 the	 “five
stages	of	change,”	the	cyclic	signs,	etc.	This	oracle	is	used	by	Chinese	soothsayers,	but	without	the	text	of
the	hexagrams	of	 the	 I	Ching.	 It	 is	 said	 to	 be	 a	 perpetuation	 of	 the	 ancient	 tortoise	 oracle,	which	was
consulted	 in	 antiquity	 in	 addition	 to	 the	 yarrow-stalk	 oracle.	 In	 the	 course	 of	 time	 it	 was	 gradually
supplanted	by	the	I	Ching,	in	the	more	rational	form	imparted	to	it	by	Confucius.



II.	The	Hexagrams	Arranged	by	Houses
THE	EIGHT	PRIMARY	TRIGRAMS	ACCORDING	TO	THEIR	FORM	(FOR	MEMORIZING)

THE	EIGHT	HOUSES
1.	The	House	of	the	Creative
1.	THE	CREATIVE	is	Heaven	(1)
2.	Heaven	with	Wind	is	COMING	TO	MEET	(44)
3.	Heaven	with	Mountain	is	RETREAT	(33)
4.	Heaven	with	Earth	is	STANDSTILL	(12)
5.	Wind	with	Earth	is	CONTEMPLATION	(20)
6.	Mountain	with	Earth	is	SPLITTING	APART	(23)
7.	Fire	with	Earth	is	PROGRESS	(35)
8.	Fire	with	Heaven	is	POSSESSION	IN	GREAT	MEASURE	(14)
2.	The	House	of	the	Abysmal
1.	THE	ABYSMAL	is	Water	(29)
2.	Water	with	Lake	is	LIMITATION	(60)
3.	Water	with	Thunder	is	DIFFICULTY	AT	THE	BEGINNING	(3)
4.	Water	with	Fire	is	AFTER	COMPLETION	(63)
5.	Lake	with	Fire	is	REVOLUTION	(49)
6.	Thunder	with	Fire	is	ABUNDANCE	(55)
7.	Earth	with	Fire	is	DARKENING	OF	THE	LIGHT	(36)
8.	Earth	with	Water	is	THE	ARMY	(7)
3.	The	House	of	Keeping	Still
1.	KEEPING	STILL	is	Mountain	(52)
2.	Mountain	with	Fire	is	GRACE	(22)
3.	Mountain	with	Heaven	is	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	GREAT	(26)
4.	Mountain	with	Lake	is	DECREASE	(41)
5.	Fire	with	Lake	is	OPPOSITION	(38)
6.	Heaven	with	Lake	is	TREADING	(10)
7.	Wind	with	Lake	is	INNER	TRUTH	(61)
8.	Wind	with	Mountain	is	DEVELOPMENT	(53)
4.	The	House	of	the	Arousing
1.	THE	AROUSING	is	Thunder	(51)
2.	Thunder	with	Earth	is	ENTHUSIASM	(16)
3.	Thunder	with	Water	is	DELIVERANCE	(40)
4.	Thunder	with	Wind	is	DURATION	(32)
5.	Earth	with	Wind	is	PUSHING	UPWARD	(46)
6.	Water	with	Wind	is	THE	WELL	(48)
7.	Lake	with	Wind	is	PREPONDERANCE	OF	THE	GREAT	(28)
8.	Lake	with	Thunder	is	FOLLOWING	(17)
5.	The	House	of	the	Gentle
1.	THE	GENTLE	is	Wind	(57)
2.	Wind	with	Heaven	is	THE	TAMING	POWER	OF	THE	SMALL	(9)
3.	Wind	with	Fire	is	THE	FAMILY	(37)
4.	Wind	with	Thunder	is	INCREASE	(42)
5.	Heaven	with	Thunder	is	INNOCENCE	(25)
6.	Fire	with	Thunder	is	BITING	THROUGH	(21)
7.	Mountain	with	Thunder	is	THE	CORNERS	OF	THE	MOUTH	(27)
8.	Mountain	with	Wind	is	WORK	ON	WHAT	HAS	BEEN	SPOILED	(18)




