
One day two peasants were conversing; one of them was boastful and untruthful, the other famed for truthfulness and honesty. The one was saying that it was better to live, telling lies and cheating everybody, and be rich; while the other replied that it was far better to live in poverty, as long as you were honest and truthful. So they began to dispute and quarrel, neither of them wishing to give in. They at last decided to go out into the village high-road, and ask the opinion of the very first person they met.
They walked and walked, and soon saw a peasant plowing in a field close to the road; they went up to him, and said, "Good man, judge our quarrel: how is it better to live in the wide world -- honestly or dishonestly? -- telling the truth or by telling lies?"

"Ah, my brothers, you cannot possibly live honestly in this world all your life! You must tell a lie now and then! Besides, an honest and truthful man must walk about all his life in straw shoes, while a liar and a dishonest man can walk in handsome boots. Take us, for example, our masters unjustly take our days from us, leaving no time for us to work in. [Footnote: The serfs were allowed three days in the week to work for themselves, while the other three days belonged to their masters.] We therefore have to pretend that we are overcome by sickness, and during that time go wood-cutting in the forest; if wood-cutting is forbidden by day, we go at night. We have always to dodge about in this world, my friends. We could not possibly get on otherwise."

"Do you hear that?" said the liar to the honest man. "What I told you was perfectly true!"

But his companion would not be convinced, so they walked on farther, till they came across a merchant driving a wagon.

"Stop for a moment, good sir!" they cried. "We want you to do us a favor, if you will not resent it, and promise not to be angry with us."

"What is it?"

"We want you to decide our quarrel, and tell us whether it is better to live honestly in this world or dishonestly?"

"Ah, my children! it is difficult to live honestly. For my part, I think it is best to be dishonest; people cheat us, so why should we not cheat them?"

"You hear!" cried the liar to his companion. "This good man is of my opinion, like the other."

Still the truthful man would not listen to his friend, so they went on farther and met a noble coming along the road. They stopped him, and said, "Kindly judge our quarrel for us; how is it best to live in this world, honestly or dishonestly?"

"Well, you certainly have found something to quarrel about. You must have been very hard pressed for conversation. Of course, being dishonest is the only way to get on. What honesty and truthfulness is there in this world? You get sent to Siberia if you are honest and tell the truth!"

"You see, my friend, I am right after all!" said the liar." Everyone thinks as I do, that it is better to live dishonestly."

"No," said the truthful man, " it is not better, and I do not intend to live dishonestly, to please any one. If any misfortunes happen to me -- well, let them!"

After this the two men went off in search of work; they journeyed on together for some time. The dishonest man always knowing how to adapt himself to the company he was in, wherever he went he had plenty to eat and drink and nothing to pay; while the honest man had to work for every drop of water and morsel of bread he got -- yet he did not grumble; he was perfectly satisfied.

The dishonest man meanwhile laughed to himself as he watched his companion.

When they had at last passed the village and reached the open country, where there were no inns or houses of any kind, the honest man became very hungry, and asked his companion to give him a morsel of bread, for he had plenty.

"But what will you give me for the bread?"

"Take whatever you like, though I have not much to lose."

"Well, then, let me put out your eye!"

"Very well, put it out!"

The horrid man did so, and gave him a very small piece of bread in return.

They went on and on, until the honest man again became hungry, and asked his friend for another piece of bread.

"Very well, on condition that you let me knock out your other eye!"

"But if you do that, brother, I shall be blind!"

"Well, what matters, you are an honest, truthful man, you ought not to mind!"

"Well, if it must be so, it must! One cannot put up with hunger. If you are not afraid of committing the sin, knock out my eye and be happy."

The wretch did so, and giving his unfortunate companion a still smaller piece of bread than the first, left him in the middle of the deserted country road, and said, "Go, find your way by yourself. I am not going to lead a blind man about!"

After having eaten his piece of bread, the blind man felt his way along.

"Perhaps," thought he, "I may manage to find my way to the next village."

But he soon lost his way, and did not know where to go. He stopped, and throwing himself on his knees, began to pray to the saints to help him.

"Do not forsake me, miserable sinner that I am!" he cried.

He prayed and prayed for a long time, and then heard a voice quite close to him saying, "Turn to your right, good man, and you will come to a forest where you will hear the murmur of a fountain; feel your way to it, bathe your eyes in the clear water, and your eyesight will be restored. You will then see a large oak tree, climb up into it, and stop there through the night."

The blind man turned to the right, and with some difficulty reached the forest. He crawled along a path which soon brought him up to the murmuring fountain, and dipping his hands into the water, he began bathing his eyes. No sooner had he done so when his eyesight returned, and he was able to look about him once more. Not very far from the fountain stood an old oak tree, under which the grass seemed to have been greatly trampled down, and the earth around was dug up here and there and scattered about everywhere. He climbed up into the tree and waited until nightfall.

At about midnight a number of evil spirits came flying down from all sides on to the trampled grass, and began boasting about what they had done and where they had been.

One little devil said, "I went to the beautiful princess, the king's daughter, and tormented her all day. I have gone on tormenting her for over ten years, and no one can cast me out, though many a handsome prince has tried, but all in vain; and, between ourselves, no one will ever succeed unless some fellow obtains that large image of the Virgin Mary, which is in the possession of a certain wealthy merchant; but then no one would ever think of that, and besides, if they did, the merchant would never part with it."

In the morning when all the devils had flown away, our friend the truthful man, who had heard the whole of the conversation, came down from his hiding place in the tree and went in search of the rich merchant.

After inquiring everywhere, he at last found the merchant, and asked him to take him as a workman, saying, "I will work hard for you for a whole year, but I want no wages. All I ask for is to have the famous image of the Virgin Mary which is in your possession."

The merchant consented, and the man worked away night and day, without a moment's rest, for he was very anxious to please his master. When the year was over he came to the merchant and asked for his reward.

"I am more than pleased with your work," the merchant said; "but I do not wish to part with the picture. Would not money do as well? You could have as much of it as you pleased, if that would satisfy you."

"No; money would be of no use to me. Give me what you promised, and what you agreed upon when you took me."

"It is hard for me to part with that picture; in fact, I don't know what I should do without it! Still, if you will work another year for me, I will give it to you."

There was no help for it, and the truthful man was obliged to consent.

When the year was over, the merchant was again loath to part with the picture.

"I would rather reward you with all possible treasures," the merchant said, "than part with the picture; but if you are determined to have it, you must stop with me and work for another year."

It was difficult to argue with such a rich and influential man as the merchant; besides, it would not have been wise, under the circumstances. So our friend stayed and worked for his master another whole year, better and harder, if possible, than before.

At the end of the third year the merchant actually took down the picture from the wall, and gave it to the man, saying, "Take it, my good fellow, for you have worked so hard and so well, without ever grumbling, that I cannot refuse you this time; take it, and may the saints bless you."

The truthful man thanked the merchant, and taking the picture went to the king's palace, where the devil was tormenting the princess.

"I can cure the princess," he said to the servants and people at court. When they heard this they seized him by the hands and brought him before the king, who was sitting on his throne, looking the picture of misery.

The king at once had him taken to the room where the afflicted princess was kept. The man then asked for a large bowl of fresh water, into which he dipped the picture three times, and then bringing the water to the beautiful princess made her bathe her face in it. Hardly had she done so, when out sprang the demon, writhing until he became lifeless. When the enemy had expired, the lovely damsel became quite well and bright again.

The king and queen were delighted, and did not know how they could best reward the good man who had proved such an excellent doctor. They wanted to ennoble him; they wanted to give him a quantity of all kinds of treasures and good things; but no, he would have nothing.

"I don't want anything," he said.

"I shall marry him," the princess whispered to her father, "if he would care to have me!"

"Very well!" replied the king.

As for our friend he did not object in the least, but was delighted. The wedding was then prepared, and the news immediately spread all over the kingdom, so that when the great day arrived there was quite a crowd to see the bride and bridegroom.

From that day forth our friend, the truthful man, lived in the palace, was clad in royal garments, and dined at the king's table.

Time passed, and our friend asked the king and queen to let him go and have a look at his own country.

"I have an old mother living in the village from which I come, and I want to see her again."

"Let us go together," said the princess.

So they drove off in a lovely carriage and pair belonging to the king. They drove and drove, and on their way they met the wretch who had knocked out our friend's eyes.

When the king's son-in-law saw him he stopped the carriage, and called out, "How are you, my brother? Have you forgotten me? Do you not remember the quarrel we had together about honesty and dishonesty? and you knocking my eyes out because I did not agree with you."

The wretch began to tremble and did not know what to do or what to say.

"Do not be afraid, my friend," said the other. " I am not angry with you."

And then he began to explain everything to the dishonest man; how he had gone to the forest, and what he had heard there, and how he had worked three years for the rich merchant, and then received the picture of the Virgin Mary, and had at last married the king's beautiful daughter.

When the dishonest man heard this, he thought he would also go into the forest and climb up the old oak tree.

"Perhaps," said he to himself, "I shall be just as fortunate as my friend!"

So he went to the forest, found the murmuring fountain and the old oak tree, into which he climbed and waited until nightfall.

At midnight the evil spirits again flew down from all sides on to the grass below; but this time they looked up, and seeing the dishonest man hiding in the tree, they seized him and tore him into a number of very small pieces.

Source: Edith M. S. Hodgetts, Tales and Legends from the Land of the Tzar: Collection of Russian Stories, second edition (London: Griffith Farran and Company, 1891), pp. 233-41.
Return to the table of contents.
Justice or Injustice? Which Is Best?
Serbia
A king had two sons; of these, one was cunning and unjust, the other, just and gentle.
After the death of the father the elder son said to the younger, "Depart; I will not live with you any longer. Here are three hundred ducats and a horse: this is your portion of our father's property. Take it, for I owe you nothing more than this."

The younger son took the money and the horse which were offered him, and said, "Thank God! See only how much of the kingdom has fallen to me!"

Some time afterwards the two brothers, both of whom were riding, met by chance in a road. The younger brother greeted the elder one, saying, "God help thee, brother!"

And the elder answered, "Why do you speak always about God? Nowadays injustice is better than justice."

The younger brother, however, said to him, "I will wager with you that injustice is not, as you say, better than justice."

So they betted one hundred golden zechins, and it was arranged that they should leave the decision to the first man they met in the road. Riding together a little farther they met with Satan, who had disguised himself as a monk, and they asked him to decide which was better, justice or injustice?

Satan answered, "Injustice!" And the good brother paid the bad one the hundred golden zechins which he had wagered.

Then they betted for another hundred zechins, and again a third time for a third hundred, and each time Satan -- who managed to disguise himself in different ways and meet them -- decided that injustice was better than justice. Thus the younger brother lost all his money, and his horse into the bargain.

Then he said, "Thank God! I have no more money, but I have eyes, and I wager my eyes that justice is better than injustice."

Thereupon the unjust brother, without waiting for any one's decision, drew his knife and cut both his brother's eyes out, saying, "Now you have no eyes, let justice help you."

But the younger brother in his trouble only thanked God and said, "I have lost my eyes for the sake of God's justice, but I pray you, my brother, give me a little water in some vessel to wash my wounds and wet my mouth, and bring me away from this place to the pine tree just about the spring, before you leave me."

The unjust brother did so, gave him water, and left him alone under the pine tree near the spring of water. There the unfortunate remained, sitting on the ground.

Late, however, in the night, some fairies came to the spring to bathe, and one of them came to the spring to bathe, and one of them said to the others, "Do you know, my sisters, that the king's daughter has got the leprosy? The king has summoned all the physicians, but no one can possibly help her. But if the king only knew, he would take a little of this water in which we are bathing, and wash his daughter therewith; and then in a day and a night she would recover completely from her leprosy. Just as any one deaf, or dumb, or blind, could be cured by this same water."

Then, as the cocks began to crow, the fairies hurried away. As soon as they were gone, the unfortunate man felt his way slowly with his outstretched hands till he came to the spring of water. There he bathed his eyes, and in an instant recovered his sight.

After that he filled the vessel with water, and hurried away to the king, whose daughter was leprous, and said to the servants, "I am come to cure the king's daughter, if he will only let me try. I guarantee that she will become healthy in a day and night."

When the king heard that, he ordered him to be led into the room where the girl was, and made her immediately bathe in the water. After a day and a night the girl came out pure and healthy. Then the king was greatly pleased, and gave the young prince the half of his kingdom, and also his daughter for a wife, so that he became the king's son-in-law, and the first man after him in the kingdom.

The tidings of this great event spread all over the world, and so came to the ears of the unjust brother. He guessed directly that his blind brother must have met with good fortune under the pine tree, so he went himself to try to find it also. He carried with him a vessel full of water, and then carved out his own eyes with his knife.

When it was dark the fairies came again, and, as they bathed, spoke about the recovery of the king's daughter. "It cannot be otherwise," they said; "someone must have been listening to our last conversation here. Perhaps someone is listening now. Let us see."

So they searched all around, and when they came to the pine tree they found there the unjust brother who had come to seek after good fortune, and who declared always that injustice was better than justice. They immediately caught him, and tore him into four parts. And so, at the last, his wickedness did not help him, and he found to his cost that justice is better than injustice.

Source: Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales, edited by W. Denton (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874), pp. 83-86.
Link to another translation of this story: John T. Naaké, "Right and Wrong," Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 130-34.
Return to the table of contents.
The Two Brothers
Slavic Once upon a time there were two brothers whose father had left them but a small fortune. The eldest grew very rich, but at the same time cruel and wicked, whereas there was nowhere a more honest or kinder man than the younger. But he remained poor, and had many children, so that at times they could scarcely get bread to eat. At last, one day there was not even this in the house, so he went to his rich brother and asked him for a loaf of bread. Waste of time! His rich brother only called him beggar and vagabond, and slammed the door in his face.
The poor fellow, after this brutal reception, did not know which way to turn. Hungry, scantily clad, shivering with cold, his legs could scarcely carry him along. He had not the heart to go home, with nothing for the children, so he went towards the mountain forest. But all he found there were some wild pears that had fallen to the ground. He had to content himself with eating these, though they set his teeth on edge. But what was he to do to warm himself, for the east wind with its chill blast pierced him through and through.

"Where shall I go?" he said; "what will become of us in the cottage? There is neither food nor fire, and my brother has driven me from his door."

It was just then he remembered having heard that the top of the mountain in front of him was made of crystal, and had a fire forever burning upon it.

"I will try and find it," he said, "and then I may be able to warm myself a little."

So he went on climbing higher and higher till he reached the top, when he was startled to see twelve strange beings sitting round a huge fire. He stopped for a moment, but then said to himself, "What have I to lose? Why should I fear? God is with me. Courage!"

So he advanced towards the fire, and bowing respectfully, said, "Good people, take pity on my distress. I am very poor, no one cares for me, I have not even a fire in my cottage; will you let me warm myself at yours?"

They all looked kindly at him, and one of them said, "My son, come sit down with us and warm yourself."

So he sat down, and felt warm directly he was near them. But he dared not speak while they were silent. What astonished him most was that they changed seats one after another, and in such a way that each one passed round the fire and came back to his own place.

When he drew near the fire an old man with long white beard and bald head arose from the flames and spoke to him thus, "Man, waste not thy life here; return to thy cottage, work, and live honestly. Take as many embers as thou wilt, we have more than we need."

And having said this he disappeared. Then the twelve filled a large sack with embers, and, putting it on the poor man's shoulders, advised him to hasten home.

Humbly thanking them, he set off. As he went he wondered why the embers did not feel hot, and why they should weigh no more than a sack of paper. He was thankful that he should be able to have a fire, but imagine his astonishment when on arriving home he found the sack to contain as many gold pieces as there had been embers; he almost went out of his mind with joy at the possession of so much money. With all his heart he thanked those who had been so ready to help him in his need.

He was now rich, and rejoiced to be able to provide for his family. Being curious to find out how many gold pieces there were, and not knowing how to count, he sent his wife to his rich brother for the loan of a quart measure.

This time the brother was in a better temper, so he lent what was asked of him, but said mockingly, "What can such beggars as you have to measure?"

The wife replied, "Our neighbor owes us some wheat; we want to be sure he returns us the right quantity."

The rich brother was puzzled, and suspecting something he, unknown to his sister-in-law, put some grease inside the measure. The trick succeeded, for on getting it back he found a piece of gold sticking to it. Filled with astonishment, he could only suppose his brother had joined a band of robbers; so he hurried to his brother's cottage, and threatened to bring him before the Justice of the Peace if he did not confess where the gold came from. The poor man was troubled, and, dreading to offend his brother, told the story of his journey to the Crystal Mountain. Now the elder brother had plenty of money for himself, yet he was envious of the brother's good fortune, and became greatly displeased when he found that his brother won every one's esteem by the good use he made of his wealth. At last he determined to visit the Crystal Mountain himself.

"I may meet with as good luck as my brother," said he to himself. Upon reaching the Crystal Mountain he found the twelve seated round the fire as before, and thus addressed them, "I beg of you, good people, to let me warm myself, for it is bitterly cold, and I am poor and homeless."

But one of them replied, "My son, the hour of thy birth was favorable; thou art rich, but a miser; thou art wicked, for thou hast dared to lie to us. Well dost thou deserve thy punishment."

Amazed and terrified he stood silent, not daring to speak. Meanwhile the twelve changed places one after another, each at last returning to his own seat. Then from the midst of the flames arose the white-bearded old man and spoke thus sternly to the rich man, "Woe unto the wilful! Thy brother is virtuous, therefore have I blessed him. As for thee, thou art wicked, and so shall not escape our vengeance."

At these words the twelve arose. The first seized the unfortunate man, struck him, and passed him on to the second; the second also struck him and passed him on to the third; and so did they all in their turn, until he was given up to the old man, who disappeared with him into the fire.

Days, weeks, months went by, but the rich man never returned, and none knew what had become of him. I think, between you and me, the younger brother had his suspicions but he very wisely kept them to himself.

Source: Alexander Chodsko, Fairy Tales of the Alav Peasants and Herdsmen, from the French of Alex. Chodsko; translated and illustrated by Emily J. Harding (London: George Allen, 1896), pp. 3-9.
Return to the table of contents.
The Two Brothers
Georgia
Once upon a time there were two brothers. Each of them possessed ten loaves of bread; and they said, "Let us go and seek our fortune." So they arose and went forth.
When they had gone a little way they were hungry. One brother said to the other, "Come, let us eat thy bread first, then we can eat mine." And he agreed, and they took of his loaves and did eat, and they afterwards went on their way.

And they travelled for some time in this manner. At last, when these ten loaves were finished, the brother who had first spoken said, "Now, my brother, thou canst go thy way and I shall go mine. Thou hast no loaves left, and I will not let thee eat my bread." So saying, he left him to continue his journey alone.

He went on and on, and came to a mill in a thick forest. He saw the miller and said, "For the love of God, let me stay here tonight."

The miller answered, "Brother, it is a very terrible thing to be here at night; as thou seest, even I go elsewhere. Presently wild beasts will assemble in the wood, and probably come here."

"Have no fear for me; I shall stay here. The beasts cannot kill me," answered the boy.

The miller tried to persuade him not to endanger his life, but when he found his arguments were of no avail he rose and went home. The boy crept inside the hopper of the mill.

There appeared, from no one knows where, a big bear; he was followed by a wolf, then a jackal; and they all made a great noise in the mill. They leaped and bounded just as if they were having a dance. He was terrified, and, trembling from fear, he lay down, quaking all over, in the hopper.

At last the bear said, "Come, let each of us tell something he has seen or heard."

"We shall tell our tales, but you must begin," cried his companions.

The bear said, "Well, on a hill that I know dwells a mouse. This mouse has a great heap of money, which it spreads out when the sun shines. If anyone knew of this mouse's hole, and went there on a sunny day, when the money is spread out, and struck the mouse with a twig, and killed it, he would become possessed of great wealth."

"That is not wonderful!" said the wolf. "I know a certain town where there is no water, and every mouthful has to be carried a great distance, and an enormous price is paid for it! The inhabitants do not know that in the center of their town, under a certain stone, is beautiful, pure water. Now, if any one knew of this, and would roll away that stone, he would obtain great wealth."

"That is nothing," said the jackal. "I know of a king who has one only daughter, and she has been an invalid for three years. Quite a simple remedy would cure her: if she were bathed in a bath of beech leaves she would be healed. You have no idea what a fortune any one would get if he only knew this."

When they had spoken thus, day began to dawn. The bear, the wolf, and the jackal went away into the wood. The boy came out of the hopper, gave thanks to God, and went to the mouse's hole, of which the bear had spoken.

He arrived, and saw that the story was true. There was the mouse with the money spread out. He stole up noiselessly, and, taking twigs in his hand, he struck the mouse until he had killed it, and then gathered up the money. Then he went to the waterless town, rolled away the stone, and behold! streams of water flowed forth. He received a reward for this, and set out for the kingdom of which the jackal had spoken.

He arrived, and enquired of the king, "What wilt thou give me if I cure thy daughter?"

The king replied, "If thou canst do this I will give thee my daughter to wife."

The youth prepared the remedy, made the princess bathe in it, and she was cured. The king rejoiced greatly, gave him the maiden in marriage, and appointed him heir to the kingdom.

This story reached the ears of the youth's brother. He went on and on, and it came to pass that he found his brother. He asked him, "How and by what cunning has this happened?"

The fortunate youth told him all in detail.

"I also shall go and stay at that mill a night or two."

His brother used many entreaties to dissuade him, and when he would not listen, said, "Well, go if thou wilt, but I warn thee again it is very dangerous."

However, he would not be persuaded, and went away. He crept into the hopper, and was there all night.

From some place or other arrived the former guests -- the bear, the wolf, and the jackal.

The bear said, "That day when I told you my story the mouse was killed, and the money all taken away."

The wolf said, "And the stone was rolled away in the waterless town of which I spoke."

"And the king's daughter was cured," added the jackal.

"Then perhaps someone was listening when we talked here," said the bear. "Perhaps someone is here now," shrieked his companions.

"Then let us go and look; certainly no one shall listen again," said the three; and they looked in all the corners. They sought and sought everywhere. At last the bear looked into the hopper, and saw the trembling boy. He dragged him out and tore him to pieces.
