Airtel Announces
5G Ready Network

In a major landmark, Bharti Airtel (“Airtel”), India's premier communications solutions provider, announced that it has become the country's first telco to successfully demonstrate & orchestrate LIVE 5G service over a commercial network in Hyderabad city.

Airtel did this over its existing liberalised spectrum in the 1800 MHz band through the NSA (Non Stand Alone) network technology. Using a first of its kind, dynamic spectrum sharing, Airtel seamlessly operated 5G and 4G concurrently within the same spectrum block. This demonstration has emphatically validated the 5G readiness of Airtel's network across all domains - Radio, Core and Transport.

Airtel 5G is capable of delivering 10x speeds, 10x latency and 100x concurrency when compared to existing technologies. Specifically, in Hyderabad, users were able to download a full length movie in a matter of seconds on a 5G phone. This demonstration has underlined the company's technology capabilities. The full impact of the 5G experience, however, will be available to our customers, when adequate spectrum is available and government approvals received.

Gopal Vittal, MD & CEO, Bharti Airtel said: “I am very proud of our engineers who have worked tirelessly to showcase this incredible capability in Tech City, Hyderabad today. Every one of our investments is future proofed as this game changing test in Hyderabad proves. With Airtel being the first operator to demonstrate this capability, we have shown again that we have always been the first in India to pioneer new technologies in our quest for empowering Indians everywhere.”

“We believe India has the potential to become a global hub for 5G innovation. To make that happen we need the eco system to come together – applications, devices and network innovation. We are more than ready to do our bit.” added Gopal Vittal.
Airtel and Qualcomm to
collaborate for 5G in India

New Delhi, February 23, 2021: Bharti Airtel (“Airtel”), India’s premier communications solutions provider, and Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. today announced their collaboration for accelerating 5G in India. Recently, Airtel became India’s first telco to demonstrate 5G over a LIVE commercial network in the city of Hyderabad.

Through Airtel’s network vendors and device partners, Airtel will utilize the Qualcomm® 5G RAN Platforms to roll-out virtualized and Open RAN-based 5G networks. Airtel, as a board member of the O-RAN Alliance, is committed to driving the success of O-RAN and is working with Qualcomm Technologies to explore and implement the O-RAN approach for India. The flexible and scalable architecture of O-RAN will create new opportunities for small and medium-sized businesses to become viable players in the deployment of 5G networks.

In addition, Airtel and Qualcomm Technologies will collaborate to enable a wide array of use cases, including 5G Fixed Wireless Access (FWA) that is designed to deliver broadband connectivity at Gigabit speeds to homes and businesses. This collaboration also aims to allow a faster rollout of broadband services in a cost effective and expeditious manner across India for “last mile” connectivity challenges that are becoming increasingly important in today’s remote, mobile-first society.

Airtel 5G solutions including FWA services will be able to deliver multi-gigabit internet speeds wirelessly to customers and open up a wide range of innovations. For customers, the ultra-fast and low latency of 5G will unlock a digital world of limitless possibilities – gigabit size file downloads in seconds and 4K video streaming on the go across smartphones and computing devices, Immersive Technologies such as Virtual Reality and SMART Homes with connected things.

Randeep Sekhon, CTO, Bharti Airtel said, “Airtel has been a pioneer of new technologies and our networks are fully ready for 5G. We are delighted to have Qualcomm Technologies as a key technology provider in our journey to roll-out world-class 5G in India. With Airtel’s integrated service portfolio and Qualcomm Technologies’ 5G leadership, we will be well placed to usher India into the next era of hyper-fast and ultra-low latency digital connectivity.”

Rajen Vagadia, Vice President, QUALCOMM India Private Limited and President, Qualcomm India said, “There is a compelling case to accelerate the roll-out of 5G networks in India, as it will help fast-track the country’s socio-economic growth and development. We are pleased to be working with Airtel, and we are excited by the opportunity ahead. This collaboration is expected to play a critical role in Airtel’s plans to add 5G network coverage and capacity where and when it is needed the most.”

Qualcomm® 5G Fixed Wireless Access Platform supports virtually any combination of 5G spectrum bands and modes, from extended-range high power sub-6 to extended-range mmWave. The portfolio of Qualcomm 5G RAN platforms aim to deliver cutting-edge technology for virtualized, flexible and interoperable 5G infrastructure. Through Airtel’s network vendors and device partners, Airtel will utilize the capabilities of these platforms for accelerating the development of 5G applications for Industry 4.0 use cases and for driving innovations for Airtel’s global operations.
Airtel and Nokia sign
multi-year deal to boost network capacity and customer experience

• Airtel to deploy Nokia's Single Radio Access Network (SRAN) solution to enhance network capacity in world’s second largest telecoms market
• End-to-end deal includes AirScale Radio Access, Baseband and related Services
• Enhances 5G readiness of Airtel's network

28 April 2020

Espoo, Finland – Nokia and Bharti Airtel (“Airtel”) today announced a multi-year agreement to deploy Nokia’s SRAN solution across 9 circles1 in India, helping Airtel to enhance the network capacity of its networks, in particular 4G, and improve customer experience.

The rollout, which will also lay the foundation for providing 5G connectivity in the future, will see approximately 300,000 radio units deployed across several spectrum bands, including 900 Mhz, 1800 Mhz, 2100 Mhz and 2300 Mhz, and is expected to be completed by 2022.

These Nokia supplied networks will give Airtel the best possible platform for when 5G networks launch across the country, with their low latency and faster speeds. Independent network performance testing company, RootMetrics3, recognized Nokia as market leader in LTE in terms of performance including network speed, network reliability and data performance.

India is the second largest telecoms market in the world and is expected to reach 920 million unique mobile customers by 2025, which will also include 88 million 5G connections according to the GSMA2. The country is experiencing a massive increase in demand for data services with traffic increasing by 47 per cent in 2019 alone, according to Nokia’s MBiT Index 2020. Nokia’s SRAN solution will help Airtel to address this growing demand by adding network capacity and ensuring a superior quality of experience to its customers.

Nokia's SRAN solution helps operators to manage their 2G, 3G and 4G networks from one platform reducing network complexity, increasing cost efficiencies and future-proofing investment. Nokia will be the sole provider of SRAN in these 9 circles. The deal will also include Nokia’s RAN equipment, including its AirScale Radio Access, AirScale BaseBand and NetAct OSS solution, which will help Airtel to monitor and manage its network effectively. Nokia Global Services will also play a crucial role in the installation, planning and deployment of the project, which will be executed via the cloud-based Nokia Delivery Platform.

Gopal Vittal, MD & CEO (India and South Asia) at Bharti Airtel, said: “Airtel has consistently topped network performance charts in studies conducted by multiple global experts. We are committed to continuously invest in emerging network technologies to provide a best-in-class experience to our customers. This initiative with Nokia is a major step in this direction. We have been working with Nokia for more than a decade now and are delighted to use Nokia’s SRAN products in further improving the capacity and coverage of our network as we prepare for the 5G era.”

Rajeev Suri, President and Chief Executive Officer at Nokia, commented: “This is an important agreement for the future of connectivity in one of the world’s largest telecoms markets and solidifies our position in India. We have worked closely with Bharti Airtel for many years and are delighted to extend this long-standing partnership further. This project will enhance their current networks and deliver best-in-class connectivity to Airtel customers but also lay the foundations for 5G services in the future.”
Verizon Business takes Private 5G global

What you need to know:
Verizon teams up with Nokia to offer private 5G capabilities to enterprises in Europe and Asia-Pacific

Private 5G will enable organizations to deliver mission critical and real-time capabilities

Announcement marks Verizon’s continued investment in 5G and network-as-a-service strategy

NEW YORK – Verizon Business today announced the launch of its international private 5G platform for global enterprises located in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.

Delivered in partnership with Nokia, the offering will enable businesses to deploy a private industrial grade dedicated 5G network capability within their premises. In addition to ultra-low latency and increased speed, a key benefit of a private 5G network is the ability for businesses, particularly those with manufacturing, distribution and logistics facilities, to deploy a customized on-site mobile network, eliminating the need to transmit data through public networks.

"Today, we’ve announced the next phase of Verizon's global 5G vision with the launch of private 5G for our international customers,” said Tami Erwin, CEO, Verizon Business. “If the past few months have taught us anything, it’s that there’s never been a more critical time for mobility, broadband and cloud products and services. Private 5G networks will be a transformative technology that will drive the new era of disruption and innovation for enterprises around the world."

A private 5G network is a self-contained network whose components all reside in a single facility, consisting of micro towers and small cells and connects to an organization’s Local Area Network (LAN) and enterprise applications. It will utilize Nokia’s Digital Automation Cloud, a private wireless network solution with automation enablers that will allow for application deployment through a web-based interface.

“Private wireless connectivity has become central to many industries in realizing their long-term digital transformation goals. By delivering private 5G together with Verizon, we’re paving the way to accelerate digitalization for the most demanding industries who crave reliable wireless connectivity,” said Brian R. Fitzgerald, SVP Global Solutions at Nokia.

Verizon has been leading global efforts around 5G. In addition to its 5G Lab and production studio in London, the Company recently announced a 5G roaming service in South Korea and is a founding member of the 5G Future Forum, a group of global 5G leaders accelerating the delivery of 5G and interoperable MEC-enabled solutions. The launch of private 5G will also enable Verizon Media to deliver its next-generation content creation, production and distribution technologies at scale and in real-time to global audiences for customers.

“We're seeing international markets moving rapidly to deploy 5G Private Networks, which appears as a major use case for the uptake of 5G, particularly in order to capitalize on 5G investments in the enterprise market.  With the ingredients of an early mover go-to-market 5G-know-how, foundational enterprise networking and innovative 5G enabled services Verizon's go-to-market recipe with Nokia will be an attractive solution to the broader market,” said Martina Kurth, associate vice president of IDC’s European Telco Research practice.

Today’s announcement follows recent MEC partnership announcements with Microsoft, Cisco, IBM and AWS. In August, Verizon recently announced its successful completion of lab trials with Corning and Samsung on its new 5G mmWave in-building solutions.
Verizon Business, Deloitte bring 5G to retail, transforming customer experiences

What you need to know:
Verizon’s 5G and mobile edge compute, coupled with Deloitte’s retail industry and solution engineering experience, aims to improve store operating efficiency and enhance the customer experience.

The platform will drive automation with near real-time monitoring, analytics, and insights within stores, distribution centers, and warehouses, enhancing operations, enabling customer personalization, and improving inventory productivity.

BASKING RIDGE N.J. - Verizon Business and Deloitte today unveiled a 5G and mobile edge computing (MEC) retail industry digital platform that is designed to give retailers the ability to gain significant efficiencies in their retail operations and transform customer experiences. This innovative platform can unlock retail in-store data with near real-time analytics to improve customer engagement, inventory efficiency, and associate productivity. The in-store experience should be significantly enhanced by addressing challenges retailers typically face, such as out-of-stock items, plan-o-gram compliance, and frictionless/cashierless checkout.

Verizon’s 5G network and MEC, combined with advanced technologies such as video camera and sensor-based analytics, artificial intelligence (AI), and augmented reality (AR), are the foundational elements of the retail platform. Together with Deloitte’s retail industry and solution engineering experience, the two organizations have developed a set of enterprise-wide use cases that can be enabled by the platform, a reference architecture that amplifies back-office application integration value, and a customizable approach to accelerate outcomes and ROI.

Verizon Business and Deloitte are collaborating with SAP to integrate SAP’s innovative software suite, including SAP Customer Activity Repository and SAP S/4HANA® into the platform. Enablement of these technologies can offer retailers sustainable business performance and profitability acceleration across key levers, such as revenue, cost of goods sold, and operating margin.

“It’s an exciting moment to unveil this innovative retail collaboration with Deloitte and SAP,” said Tami Erwin, CEO, Verizon Business. “We are entering a new era of technology-led disruption at the exact same moment every retailer is looking to accelerate digital transformation, increase productivity and improve customer experiences. We’re ready to open the doors to Verizon’s transformative 5G and mobile edge compute platform and look forward to helping our customers reimagine everything from their employee experience and supply chain to end-customer use cases.”

Of the many use cases under co-development through this collaboration, one example is near real-time actionable intelligence to address out-of-stock shelf inventory management, where the platform generates automated replenishment notifications to in-store associates to refill shelves from the back of the house and alerts distribution centers to allocate additional inventory. This co-innovation aims to help retailers increase sales, improve margins, offer greater product availability, and give associates more time to engage with customers when they don’t have to spend as much time on activities like cycle counting.

“The opportunity for 5G and MEC to enable frictionless retail experiences and improve asset productivity should have a seismic impact on the retail industry,” said Anthony Stephan, principal, Deloitte Consulting LLP, and US Consulting consumer industry lead. “Our collaboration with Verizon Business and SAP enables us to efficiently and effectively address the concerns of retailers today, providing a best-in-class digital transformation experience that can respond and deliver at the speed of 5G.”
Verizon Business 5G Innovation Hub in Lake Nona to explore 5G-enabled solutions across industries

What you need to know:
Verizon Business is bringing 5G Ultra Wideband service to an Innovation Hub in Lake Nona, a smart community located in Orlando, FL

Innovators to test how 5G can enhance connected healthcare and technology, autonomous mobility, smart communities, health and wellness, education, retail and sports

Part of Verizon Business’ broader strategy to partner with customers, startups, universities, large enterprises and the public sector to explore how 5G can disrupt and transform nearly every industry

5G trial already underway at Lake Nona involves testing Cellular Vehicle-To-Everything (C-V2X) technology with Beep's autonomous shuttles

NEW YORK - Local startups, universities, large enterprises and the public sector will soon be able to develop and test 5G-enabled solutions at Verizon Business’ new 5G Innovation Hub in Lake Nona, a “living lab” smart community located in Orlando, FL. The new Innovation Hub will provide an opportunity to test 5G use cases for connected healthcare, autonomous mobility, smart communities, education, retail and others. Created by the Tavistock Group, Lake Nona is home to thousands of residents (known as “citizen scientists”), students, visitors, national headquarters and leading healthcare facilities and is focused on providing an ideal landscape to create new and innovative experiences across a multitude of industries.

With Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network on site, innovators will be able to test how Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband’s super-fast speeds, ultra-high bandwidth and ultra-low latency can enhance applications for industries prevalent in Lake Nona such as connected healthcare and technology, autonomous mobility, smart communities, health and wellness, education, retail and sports.

One of the 5G trials already underway at Lake Nona involves testing Cellular Vehicle-To-Everything (C-V2X) technology with Beep, an Autonomous Mobility-as-a-Service provider. The initial pilot will examine how C-V2X can improve the safety of Beep's autonomous shuttles, which currently operate on several routes throughout the community. The C-V2X pilot involves Verizon's 4G LTE and 5G Ultra Wideband networks, Multi-Access Edge Compute (MEC), Real Time Kinematics (RTK), and Computer Vision.

“5G is paving the way for unprecedented innovations that will reshape the world and have a massive impact on how we live, work, and play,” said Sampath Sowmyanarayan, SVP and President of Enterprise at Verizon. “We’re creating Innovation Hubs powered by Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband to serve as launch pads for high-impact, transformational experiences and are excited to see the new 5G use cases that will be developed in Lake Nona.”

The new Innovation Hub will also showcase existing 5G use cases for visitors to experience and includes an Executive Briefing Center that will provide prospects and customers with access to Verizon leadership and subject matter experts. Verizon started deploying its 5G Ultra Wideband network in Lake Nona earlier this year.

“Tavistock is fully committed to the cultivation of 5G technology to usher in a new era of connectivity,” said Juan Santos, Senior Vice President of Innovation at Tavistock. “A 5G-enabled future will transform our daily lives in ways we’ve only just begun to imagine. We’re excited to expand our 5G capabilities in Lake Nona and to attract the brightest minds and biggest ideas to the entrepreneurial ecosystem of Orlando.”

This engagement is part of Verizon Business’ broader strategy to partner with
enterprises, startups, universities, national labs and government/military to explore how 5G can disrupt and transform nearly every industry. Verizon operates six 5G Labs in the U.S. and one in London that specialize in developing uses cases in industries ranging from healthcare to public safety to entertainment. In addition, Verizon is setting up 5G Innovation Hubs on-premise for several customers as part of an ongoing initiative to partner on 5G-related use cases to help customers transform their industries.
Verizon continues to expand 5G Home Internet to customers across the country

What you need to know:
Verizon 5G Home Internet expands to parts of Atlanta, Dallas, Denver and San Jose.

Now customers in parts of 12 cities can take advantage of the blazing-fast wireless broadband 5G Ultra Wideband service.

New 5G Home Internet customers get YouTube TV & Amazon Smart Home Bundle on us.

5G Home Internet is $50 per month for Verizon customers1 and $70 per month for non-Verizon customers.2

BASKING RIDGE, N.J. - The expansion continues. Beginning November 5th, 5G Home Internet will expand to customers in parts of Atlanta, Dallas, Denver and San Jose. The blazing-fast Internet service is now available in parts of 12 markets, building on continued advancements of our 5G technology for customers. The new 5G Home Internet cities come on the heels of the historic expansion of 5G Ultra Wideband1 in 19 additional US cities, 19 stadiums and six airports, along with our Nationwide 5G launch.

“We continue to lead the industry forward with the unprecedented speeds of our 5G Ultra Wideband network,” said Frank Boulben, Senior Vice President of Consumer Marketing and Products at Verizon. “By deploying and expanding 5G Home Internet to even more cities, we’re providing our customers with more choices when it comes to home connectivity, which is so critical during these challenging times.”

5G Home Internet is available in the following cities today:

Why 5G Home Internet.
It’s Internet of a different kind, ideal for people working remotely, schooling at home or streaming their favorite shows. And it’s smoking fast. Customers can experience peak download speeds of up to 1 Gbps, depending on location, with typical download speeds of 300 Mbps.4

The service is $50 per month for Verizon customers and $70 per month for non-Verizon customers with no hidden fees or contracts. Customers can set up 5G Home Internet on their own time using innovative new hardware complete with augmented reality.

Choices and Smarts
Calling all bingers and streamers: Verizon has teamed up with some of the best content providers in the industry to bring customers plenty of options. New 5G Home Internet customers get YouTube TV free for one month. And for all your streaming needs, customers get a free, Stream TV device, which delivers access to an extensive library of OTT channels, apps and entertainment, including Amazon Prime Video, Disney+, Netflix and more.

For smart home lovers, there are plenty of cool toys to add to the super-fast service. New 5G Home Internet customers will get a free Amazon Smart Home Bundle, which includes an Echo Show 5, Ring Stick Up Cam, Echo Dot and Amazon Smart Plug for the smartest home around.
Verizon extends Nationwide 5G to cover 230 million people.

What you need to know:
24 million customers throughout Central Texas, Tulsa, OK, Upstate New York, and the New England area now have access to Verizon’s 5G Nationwide service for no added cost, bringing the total customers with access to the most advanced nationwide service to more than 230 million in over 2,700 cities.
Customers in parts of Tampa, St. Petersburg, Albuquerque and Durham now have access to the unprecedented performance of 5G Ultra Wideband, available in 61 cities, 48 stadiums and arenas and seven airports.
NEW YORK -  Today an additional 24 million customers have access to Verizon’s technologically advanced 5G nationwide network for no added cost.* Verizon announced continued expansion of its 5G Nationwide service to millions more customers throughout Central Texas, Tulsa, OK, Upstate New York, and the New England area, bringing the total to 230 million people able to access Verizon’s 5G capabilities and benefits in over 2,700 cities.

Additionally, Verizon has expanded access to its 5G Ultra Wideband network to customers in parts of Tampa, St Petersburg, Albuquerque and Durham, giving them access to the unprecedented speeds and capabilities of the world’s fastest 5G.** Customers in 61 cities can now experience ultra-fast wireless speeds, allowing them to download and stream movies and TV shows in seconds, videoconference and collaborate remotely in near real time, and take advantage of new immersive customer experiences never before available wirelessly. Enterprise customers in these markets now have access to the technology that can dramatically accelerate their digital transformation, revolutionizing how they interact with their customers, track inventory, manage operations and engage with their workforce.

The most advanced 5G Nationwide network

Verizon’s nationwide network is built with the most advanced technologies available in the industry.

The underlying network architecture is built on a cloud-native containerized architecture, similar to the IP-based architecture used by the most notable global tech companies, which can allow for unprecedented levels of operational automation, flexibility and adaptability.
Verizon’s 5G Nationwide employs Dynamic Spectrum Sharing technology, which allows 5G service to run simultaneously with 4G LTE on multiple spectrum bands. This new technology allows Verizon to dynamically use its full portfolio of current spectrum resources to serve both 4G and 5G customers, maximizing their experience on the Verizon network.  Customers can use Verizon’s network in a variety of ways — from virtual learning to real-time gaming — that requires the ability to allocate spectrum resources in real time.
And much of the newest expansion of Verizon’s Nationwide 5G network uses virtualization all the way to cell sites at the edge of the network.  Virtualizing the cell sites and functions, like the virtualization work previously completed in the core of the network, decouples software and hardware functionality enabling the network to be built on general purpose hardware. Using Common Off-The-Shelf (COTS) hardware leads to greater flexibility and agility in the introduction of new products and services. Instead of adding or upgrading single-purpose hardware, the move to a cloud native, container-based virtualized architecture leads to greater flexibility, faster delivery of services, greater scalability, and improved cost efficiency in networks. This virtualization will also lower the barrier to entry for new vendors in the ecosystem. New entrants can accelerate innovation, reduce operating costs, and lay the groundwork for flexible network and cloud infrastructure closer to the customer, eventually leading to single digit latency. Key 5G use cases focused on providing the best, most efficient network for customers, will heavily rely on the programmability of virtualized networks.
The world’s fastest 5G network

Using advanced technology called Carrier Aggregation, Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network is reaching 4 Gbps peak speeds in some locations.  This technology combines multiple channels of spectrum to provide greater efficiency for data sessions transmitting over the wireless network. Verizon combined eight separate channels of mmWave spectrum to achieve multi-gigabit speeds in parts of some cities. Using this technology, customers can see double the download speeds they have historically experienced on 5G Ultra Wideband, with peak speeds up to 4 Gbps possible in some locations.  Customers will also see a boost in speeds with two carrier aggregation now available for uploads. Combined with Verizon’s vast quantity of available spectrum in mmWave, carrier aggregation allows customers on 5G Ultra Wideband to achieve unprecedented mobile speeds and brings the massive bandwidth available with mmWave spectrum to life.

Verizon’s award-winning 4G LTE Network

A distinct advantage in the deployment of 5G is having a robust, dense, and high-performing 4G LTE Advanced network. Verizon’s 5G network designs share many commonalities with its award-winning 4G LTE Advanced network. The underlying small cell, fiber and radio wave infrastructure of 4G LTE has created the solid technical foundation needed to build Verizon’s 5G networks right.  And with Verizon’s award-winning 4G LTE performance, Verizon has been able to focus on building targeted mmWave services that bring a transformational experience, develop a technologically advanced 5G Nationwide network and consistently provide reliable, world-class service to customers using its 4G services.

“The technology found in both our 5G Ultrawideband and our 5G Nationwide networks reflects a massive, mulit-year innovation effort that modernizes our entire network with cutting edge capabilities,” said Kyle Malady, Chief Technology Officer of Verizon. “We believe our customers deserve 5G built right, so as we have with technology innovation and advancements throughout our history, we are committed to providing the most advanced technology with the most capabilities that will support the new 5G ecosystem and developing solutions long into the future.”
U.S. business leaders believe 5G will aid recovery from economic impact of COVID-19


What you need to know:
Seven in 10 (69%) decision-makers believe 5G will help their company overcome the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic

Nearly half (48%) of decision-makers said their companies have already provided or are planning to provide a 5G-capable smartphone or device to employees within the next six months

76% of respondents say that mobile edge computing (MEC) is important to their company

Decision-makers largely agree that 5G will create new opportunities for their company (80%), their industry (79%), and their role (79%)

BASKING RIDGE, N.J. - Verizon Business today released findings from its “Verizon 5G Business Report” highlighting the impact 5G technology is expected to have across the United States. The findings show that technology decision-makers overwhelmingly agree 5G high-speed communications networks and devices will create new growth opportunities and applications for their companies and industries within the next two years.

“Over the last year, 5G has become top-of-mind for businesses as they manage through condensed digital transformation timelines,” said Tami Erwin, CEO of Verizon Business. “Today’s findings underscore the critical role 5G will play in economic recovery and growth, and we stand committed and ready to help our partners make that transition quickly and seamlessly.”

In terms of use cases, 73% of decision-makers polled also said they already know which 5G applications will be most beneficial to their enterprises, and seven in 10 believe that 5G technologies will help them accelerate their companies’ recovery from issues posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Approximately 80% of decision-makers agreed that 5G would provide new growth opportunities for their companies. While upfront costs of 5G ranked as the highest barrier to adoption (41%), an inability to make a clear business case (10%) ranked among the lowest barriers, highlighting the high confidence among business executives regarding the power of 5G.

Businesses driving adoption
According to data from a 5G consumer study conducted in December 2020 shows that businesses are ahead of consumers in driving 5G adoption.

Key Stats:

Businesses are more aware of 5G than consumers, and they prioritize it
Most business decision-makers say they have heard “a lot” about 5G (55%) versus 1 in 5 adults when asked the same question (23%)

5G adoption is well underway across businesses
Almost half (48%) of decision-makers say their company has already provided or is planning to provide a 5G-capable smartphone or device to employees within the next six months

76% of respondents say that mobile edge computing (MEC) is important to their company

Decision-makers largely agree that 5G will create new opportunities for their company (80%), their industry (79%), and their role (79%).

A transformative impact
Among industries, a variety of distinct use cases emerge as well as nuances to drive 5G adoption.

Sports, Entertainment and Media
Key Stats:

In rethinking the live event experience, 78% indicated that leveraging 5G to incorporate augmented and virtual reality experiences would be of value

Similarly, 66% saw making virtual live events through AR and VR like the in-person experience as a valuable use case of 5G

More than half of technology decision-makers in the industry (52%) indicated that 5G planning and adoption is a top priority for C-level leaders at their organization

Government/Public Sector
Key Stats:

74% saw real-time video to monitor crowds and increase safety as a valuable impact of 5G

70% viewed faster data transfers to and from first responders as they get to and from emergency sites as a benefit of 5G

36% felt that 5G would have a transformational impact on cybersecurity

Healthcare
Key Stats:

More than 3 in 4 technology decision-makers in healthcare said 5G will change how their organization interacts with customers (78%)

Decision-makers in healthcare view use of remote health monitoring devices (81%) as the most valuable application of 5G in their industry, while use of mobile networks for high-quality telemedicine is viewed as the application that respondents believe their organization is most likely to implement, interact with, or respond to in the next two years (78%).

Operational efficiency (75%) was named as the area in which 5G will have the most noticeable impact for respondents’ organizations

Manufacturing
Key Stats:

Supporting system automation ranked highest amongst all industries and specific use cases for 5G deployment (49%) by manufacturing respondents

Real-time supply chain tracking from shipment to shelves to respond to inventory demands and help combat theft and fraud ranked highest in terms of sector specific benefits (88%) and tied with real-time tracking of capacity and production in terms of likelihood of being deployed in next two years (82%)

Retail
Key Stats:

77% of retail respondents indicated that businesses that do not adopt 5G technology will fall behind their peers

80% felt that giving customers the ability to shop from anywhere using AR and VR via 5G would be a valuable use case

Enhancing wireless internet speed and reliability (60%) was named the top priority for usage of 5G

The survey, which was conducted in partnership with Morning Consult, polled 700 business technology decision-makers across the United States to gauge interest in deploying 5G and specific use cases within the Sports/Entertainment/Media, Government/Public Sector, Healthcare, Manufacturing, and Retail industries.

In the past several months, Verizon Business has been active in bringing 5G to enterprises through agreements with companies like Digital Catapult, General Motors, Honeywell, Walgreens, and WeWork. The agreements cover a variety of use cases ranging from Network as a Service (NaaS) to commercial indoor deployments.
Verizon, Corning and Samsung complete trials of new indoor cell sites to extend 5G coverage

WEST LAKE, TX – Verizon has recently completed lab trials with Corning and begun lab trials with Samsung on new 5G mmWave in-building solutions which, when commercially launched, will provide 5G mmWave coverage inside facilities such as hospitals, manufacturing facilities, warehouses, schools, ports, retail stores and more. The launch of these indoor cell sites will not only extend the footprint of Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network, but will also bring the promise of private networks with Mobile Edge Compute (MEC) capabilities one step closer.

“An indoor cell site brings the benefits of mmWave 5G - high throughput, great capacity, high reliability and the ability for a large number of users to simultaneously use robust data applications - indoors where it may be more difficult for signals from our outside 5G network to penetrate,” said Adam Koeppe, Senior Vice President of Technology Planning and Development at Verizon.

In-building solutions have been a staple of wireless networks since their inception, providing an effective and efficient means of delivering dedicated coverage and capacity indoors for 4G LTE for many years. These similar 5G indoor solutions being tested are more compact, lower power and compatible with Verizon’s virtualization strategy.

A big leap towards private 5G networks for enterprise customers
The impending commercialization of these indoor systems are a critical step on the way to private 5G networks. A private 5G network is a smaller, self-contained network whose components all reside in a single facility. The most robust, lowest-latency, highest performing private 5G network relies on three basic components: a private core serving exclusively that single system, a radio access network (an indoor cell site like the ones being tested with Corning and Samsung), and a MEC platform.

“By combining a private core, an indoor cell site and the MEC platform in a facility, an enterprise can have a private and secure ultra-reliable, high-speed, low-latency 5G network,” said Koeppe. “A private 5G network will offer customers the potential to have the cloud within their facility. It will accelerate enterprise automation and digitization efforts, and with Verizon’s mmWave bandwidth and reliability, it will offer the scalability to manage massive numbers of devices along with advanced capabilities such as Edge AI, computer vision and other emerging technologies.”

With all three components of the network in a single facility, it increases speed and efficiency by eliminating the need for data to cross through multiple routers and across large geographies. It also eliminates the need to share core resources with the macro network and offers the flexibility to develop specific capabilities customized to the private network owner.

About the indoor cell site trials
After an industry-wide RFP, Corning’s and Samsung’s indoor cell site solutions were chosen for the Verizon network. Corning’s solution successfully completed testing in the Verizon test lab in Westlake, TX and has begun field testing in a live network environment.

Corning's mmWave solution, part of Corning's portfolio of strategic cellular solutions for the enterprise, brings 5G indoors with a sleek, easy-to-install design, delivering future-ready 5G performance by utilizing Corning's state-of-the-art composite fiber (with fiber for data transmission and copper for powering, in one cable.)

"We're pleased to open a new phase in our longtime collaboration with Verizon, which over the years has brought reliable LTE coverage to Verizon's customers in venues large and small," said Michael Bell, senior vice president and general manager, Corning Optical Communications. "Now, with Corning's mmWave solution, Verizon will showcase its 5G Ultra Wideband capabilities for the enterprise. Our mmWave solution draws on Corning's decades of experience in network design to deliver cost-effective indoor coverage that allows enterprises to reap the full benefits of 5G."

Lab trials have begun using Samsung’s 5G mmWave indoor small cell in-building product which, after successful completion, will also advance to field trials. This solution will provide a compact, discrete indoor 5G solution capable of delivering the high-throughput and lower-latency service levels to support Verizon enterprise customers’ in-building 5G service requirements.

“Building on our network collaboration with Verizon since 2009 and our global leadership in mmWave technology, we are excited to expand 5G’s next phase to the enterprise with Verizon,” said Magnus Ojert, Vice President, Networks Division, Samsung Electronics America. “These first trials of indoor small cell solutions, coupled with our recent advancements with vRAN, advance our support of Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network, and will provide their U.S. consumers and enterprises with incredible new experiences.”

Verizon expects to begin deployment of a commercial in-building product by the end of 2020.
Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband helping New Jersey small businesses rebound

Verizon 5G Helps Small Businesses in Hoboken, New Jersey | Verizon
What you need to know:
As part of the “5G Impact Challenge”, Verizon is providing several businesses with 5G hotspots, 5G smartphones and a small business solutions package

By working with various tech startups, Verizon will also develop new, customized 5G experiences that can help businesses overcome challenges and better engage customers

5G mobility experiences being created include digitizing inventory and creating immersive shopping experiences, and scanning shop items and converting the 3D models into AR experiences so customers can view items at home

NEW YORK - Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband is helping Hoboken, NJ-based small businesses impacted by COVID-19 get back on their feet, stronger than ever. As retail stores reopen with an emphasis on outdoor dining and shopping, curbside pick-up and online orders, Verizon and TechUnited are teaming up with small businesses to find ways that 5G technology can help solve some of their operational pain points brought on by the pandemic. TechUnited, which empowers entrepreneurs and innovators with programs, funding and networking opportunities, worked with Verizon to select five small businesses within Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband mobility service footprint.

The companies selected for the “5G Impact Challenge” will receive Inseego MiFi M2100 5G hotspots and Samsung Galaxy S10 5G smartphones as well as a small business solutions package customized to their needs which includes One Talk calling service, a BlueJeans by Verizon, video conferencing account, and access to Verizon’s Small Business Hub including tips from a Comeback Coach.

Some of the participants include:

Elysian Café: As the oldest continually operated bar/restaurant in Hoboken, the restaurant offers a French Bistro style menu. With limited indoor dining, maintaining a connection for mobile point of sale (POS) operations for outdoor dining can be a challenge.

SOHO Flower & Garden: A brother, sister owned business specializing in gardening and flower arrangements, the shop is looking for new ways to connect with customers and boost sales.

Joey No Nuts: The coffee shop, which offers nut-free drinks and food, opened in October 2019 by a husband and wife team. The cafe now performs all of its sales at a takeout window and is looking to attract customers to sit and enjoy coffee and baked goods outside.

Corporate Realty: A family-owned and operated real estate business established in 1989, the company has been forced to adapt to virtual solutions and forego traditional operations.

According to Verizon’s Small Business Recovery survey, more than half of small businesses have concerns about staying afloat financially with social distancing regulations that limit business capacity.

 "In times like these, the world leans on technology to help us stay connected,” said TJ Fox, President of Business Markets at Verizon. “This is especially true for our local communities and retail shops, which is why Verizon has joined in this effort to show small businesses how 5G connectivity can open the door to new and immersive solutions as a way to interact with customers."

“Without the help of technology, we wouldn’t still be in business today,” said Dominic Yun, owner of SOHO Flower & Garden. “Prior to COVID, we had a website but didn’t do online sales. Thankfully, we were able to quickly shift to online orders which helped us stay afloat. Now we’re doing in store sales again, but we still need to monitor how many people are in the store at a time. We’re thankful Verizon and TechUnited are listening to our challenges and helping us figure out how we can use 5G to solve them.”

Verizon is working with several tech startups to develop new, customized 5G experiences that can help these businesses overcome their challenges and better engage customers. Some of the experiences being created include digitizing inventory and creating immersive shopping experiences, using BlueJeans to connect with customers for virtual “how to” educational events, and using Bookful to engage children through AR storytelling experiences with interactive and educational features.

“Having detailed photos and immersive videos online are now more important than ever to engage people who are skittish about coming into the office or going to the physical locations,“ said Basil Skaltsis, owner of Corporate Realty. “By giving customers the ability to scan a listing in the window and get a virtual tour, or using BlueJeans on my phone to give customers a live tour is exciting. This program is like making a new friend that helps you out in your time of need.”

“By offering our customers 5G guest WiFi, we’re hoping they’ll sit and work remotely and be able to entertain themselves and their kids by easily streaming video content and games,” said Jess Dyer, owner of Joey No Nuts. “Verizon and TechUnited have been a huge help in speeding up transactions, connecting us with other small businesses in the area, and helping us find new ways to engage and attract customers.”

“Imagine holding a bouquet of flowers in your hands using augmented reality before you order it or walking by a real estate store window and virtually stepping into the home right there on your phone,” said Nicki Palmer, chief product officer at Verizon. “5G’s massive bandwidth, super-fast speeds and low latency are providing these businesses with greater connectivity and 5G guest WiFi TODAY. We’re so excited to help them bounce back by using the power of 5G to create new transformational experiences that can increase customer engagement while allowing them to stay safe and practice social distancing.”

“I’m so proud to have TechUnited team up with Verizon to provide technology-based solutions at such a critical time for small businesses,” shared Aaron Price, CEO of TechUnited. “As technology continues to evolve to help those that have been devastated by the pandemic, small businesses should know that they can count on TechUnited and Verizon to bring them solutions to rebuild and grow.”
Verizon and Corning launch commercial indoor 5G; WeWork among first adopters

Things to know:
First deployment of indoor 5G cell sites brings this solution from proof of concept to commercially available and scalable.

Indoor 5G cell sites are a vital step in extending the footprint of Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network, will enable private 5G networks for enterprise customers

WeWork signed contract for indoor cell site deployment in ten locations across the US transforming what’s possible in a flexible work environment

NEW YORK - After successful trials in September, Verizon Business and Corning have begun commercial installations of in-building cell sites for enterprise customers, advancing this solution from proof of concept to commercially available and scalable in just a few months. Initial deployments are happening in Verizon retail store locations to provide the fastest 5G Ultra Wideband experience for customers and employees and are also set to be installed at WeWork locations across the US.

“We believe our customers deserve the most advanced 5G technology to provide a genuinely differentiated and superior service,” said Tami Erwin, CEO of Verizon Business. “We have quickly moved from proof of concept to commercial availability and now scalability for our enterprise customers. The unprecedented performance of 5G Ultra Wideband is not just an investment for growth, it is a critical step in our customers' digital transformation.”

WeWork, a global leader in flexible space solutions, is one of the first companies in the world to have signed a contract with Verizon Business to provide Corning’s indoor 5G cells, with ten WeWork locations across the US set to receive installations. Understanding the ever-increasing technology demands of businesses and employees due to Covid-19 and the acceleration of their digital transformations, this collaboration will help meet these needs by creating an agile hybrid model, while offering the ability to harness the power of Verizon 5G.

As technology continues to shape the future of work, 5G networks are set to play a fundamental role in improving the user experience, facilitating next generation connectivity and allowing users to access unprecedented network speeds.

“As the last several months have shown, the demand for flexible space solutions, accompanied with the ability to connect to reliable, fast networks, has never been more valuable. That is why WeWork, a leader in flexible space, is partnering with companies like Verizon, to elevate the quality of business solutions available to members in our spaces so that they are able to run and grow their business’’, said Hamid Hashemi, Chief Product and Experience Officer at WeWork.

What indoor cell sites will enable and why it matters
Corning’s indoor cell site is designed to provide Verizon’s 5G mmWave service inside facilities such as hospitals, manufacturing facilities, warehouses, schools, ports, commercial office space, retail stores and any indoor environment where large amounts of data traffic must be managed and optimized. The launch of these indoor cell sites will not only extend the footprint of Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network, but will also bring the promise of private networks with Mobile Edge Compute (MEC) capabilities one step closer.

“In order to move the cloud into an organization’s facility, they must first have access to the fastest 5G in the marketplace,” said Erwin. “By combining access to our 5G Ultra Wideband indoors, with a private MEC platform to bring the power of the cloud into a business’ facility, and a private core that helps to run the operations of the Network, an enterprise will be able to have a secure, ultra-reliable, high-speed, low-latency private 5G solution.”

Having all three components (5G Ultra Wideband indoors, private MEC, private network core) of the Private 5G network in a single facility will increase speed and efficiency by eliminating the need for data to cross through multiple routers and across large geographies. It will also eliminate the need to share core resources with the macro network and offer the flexibility to develop specific capabilities customized to the private network owner.

A private 5G network will accelerate enterprise automation and digitization efforts, enhance how customers interact in a retail environment, support sensors and alerts in all aspects of an operation, and provide real-time, on-site video analysis. With Verizon’s mmWave bandwidth and reliability, it will offer the scalability to manage massive numbers of devices along with advanced capabilities such as Edge AI, computer vision and other emerging technologies.

Corning's indoor 5G solution, part of Corning's portfolio of indoor cellular solutions for the enterprise, features a fully integrated baseband unit, radios and antennas in a sleek package. It delivers future-ready 5G performance by utilizing Corning's innovative composite fiber, with fiber for data transmission and copper for powering in a single cable.

"Corning is pleased to see our 5G mmWave indoor cell sites play a critical role in Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband network -- bringing high-speed, low-latency network capabilities to Verizon's enterprise customers," said Michael O’Day, vice president, Corning Optical Communications. "Enterprises need a cost-effective way to unlock the opportunities of indoor 5G, and Corning's easy-to-install solution is designed to meet that need. We're delighted Verizon will bring these capabilities to their customers, in the latest example of our long-standing collaboration."
Verizon customers will be able to take the power of 5G global

Learn more
BASKING RIDGE, NJ - Continuing its global 5G leadership, Verizon has become the first US operator to successfully complete 5G global roaming trials and have a commercially ready 5G global roaming service. Customers traveling from the US to South Korea with a compatible device can enjoy the benefits of 5G service internationally.

The successful trials for voice, data and text messaging were conducted on the live production 5G network in South Korea with a prototype device using dual frequencies. The 5G device, which can access 5G services in the US using mmWave spectrum, accessed 5G on 3.5 GHz spectrum in Korea. Average speeds recorded during the trial were 252 Mbps downlink and 119 Mbps uplink.

This is the first step in global 5G interoperability.

“As 5G matures, the global implications are enormous,” said Kyle Malady, Chief Technology Officer for Verizon. “From global manufacturing and supply chain, to international AR/VR experiences, the globalization of 5G has huge implications across countless industries for consumers and enterprises. Imagine being able to get the best medical treatment from anywhere in the world through telemedicine, shop in the finest boutiques in Italy through augmented reality, play against the champions in online gaming anywhere in the world, or manage manufacturing operations across continents in real time remotely. Our team is leading the way to make those possibilities a reality and this is an important first step.”

More countries to come
South Korea is just the first of many countries with whom Verizon is forging global 5G roaming partnerships. Preparations for trials with other countries are underway.

“We are in the early phases of global roaming partnerships with other countries and will continue to look for strategic partnerships with international providers who, like Verizon, are leading the 5G evolution. This roaming service with South Korea will serve as a model as we engage with 5G providers in other countries to provide our customers who travel globally with more options,” said Malady.

Verizon’s global vision
The power of 5G does not stop at national borders, and Verizon has been leading global efforts around 5G. Verizon is a founding member of the 5G Future Forum, a group of global 5G leaders accelerating the delivery of mobile edge compute (MEC) -enabled solutions around the world.

The mission of the 5G Future Forum (5GFF) is to develop 5G interoperability specifications to accelerate the delivery of 5G and MEC solutions around the world. The Forum’s founding members have been working to create the governance structure for the 5GFF, as well as develop both technical and commercial workstreams.

The Forum will release its first technical specifications to its members in the third quarter of 2020 – a major step forward in enabling global interoperability for 5G and mobile edge compute deployment to deliver efficient and innovative services to customers.
Verizon and Snap Inc. debut first-ever 5G Landmarker Lens

What you need to know:
Verizon and Snap Inc. are launching the first-ever 5G Landmarker Lens, an augmented reality experience exclusively for Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband customers.

The 5G Landmarker Lens uses augmented reality to deliver a musical performance from the Grammy® nominated band Black Pumas at the New York Public Library.

Experience features the first full-length song ever used in a Snapchat augmented reality Lens, and the virtual performance was shot by Verizon Media's RYOT in the first and only 5G production studio in the country.

NEW YORK - Verizon and Snap Inc. today released the first-ever 5G-enabled Landmarker Lens exclusively for Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband customers with 5G smartphones. The Lens uses Snapchat’s industry leading augmented reality technology and Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband increased capacity to bring to life a musical performance by Grammy® nominated psychedelic soul band Black Pumas at the New York Public Library. This is the first 5G experience from Verizon and Snap Inc.’s 5G innovation partnership.

Opening Snapchat and using the Verizon Lens on the NY Public Library transforms it into a next generation stage where Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband customers with 5G smartphones can watch the Black Pumas Eric Burton’s 3D Bitmoji dance to the entire hit song “Colors” in front of an explosion of flora and fauna from the sidewalks of 5th Avenue. A shorter, non-5G enabled version of the Landmarker is available for everyone to experience through Snapchat, even non-Verizon customers.

“There’s no better way to demonstrate the sheer power of Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband than by creating unique experiences that align with consumers’ interests and take them to places they never imagined possible,” said Frank Boulben, Verizon Senior Vice President of Consumer Marketing and Products. “The 5G Landmarker Lens is an example of how 5G can redefine music experiences through augmented reality. We look forward to bringing more of these new, creative customer experiences to life via our partnership with Snap.”

The performance was shot by Verizon Media's RYOT in the first and only 5G production studio in the country. RYOT used motion capture technology to track Black Pumas’ lead singer Eric Burton’s movement, which RYOT and Snap brought to life as an animated 3D Bitmoji. This marks the first musical performance shot on the RYOT motion capture stage for a 5G phone experience.

“At Snap, we’re always looking for ways to push the envelope with augmented reality. 5G’s increased speeds and lower latency means that we can do more with AR than ever before, and innovation partners like Verizon are helping us transition seamlessly into this new world. Together we are creating and scaling incredible new experiences, and it starts with this new Landmarker Lens” said Jared Grusd, Chief Strategy Officer, Snap Inc.

Verizon is also launching a 4G Worldview Lens featuring the Black Pumas that can be accessed anywhere in the US. The Lens will be accessible to all US Snapchatters in the Snapchat Lens carousel beginning November 22.

As part of the 5G innovation partnership, Verizon and Snap are also bringing next-generation content and augmented reality experiences to life with Snap Originals shows. Move It!, premiering November 2020, and Fake Up, premiering December 2020, will each feature a special 5G Lens experience exclusive to Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband customers in the series’ respective final episodes.

Stay tuned for more 5G-enabled experiences soon, including additional 5G Landmarker Lenses.
Deploying the 5G Ultra Wideband Network just got a little easier

What you need to know:

Using Integrated Access Backhaul (IAB) Verizon can deploy 5G service while waiting for fiber to be installed.
IAB technology along with portable power generators can be deployed on a temporary basis to create a totally self-contained mobile cell site, not reliant on commercial power or fiber connection, to support first responders when mobile cell sites are needed for search and rescue, disaster recovery or other critical situations.
While this new technology can speed 5G deployments, fiber is still essential for networks.

Going forward more of our content will be permanently logged via blockchain technology—enabling us to provide greater transparency with authoritative verification on all changes made to official releases.

Learn more
SOLVANG, CA - Verizon and Ericsson recently completed a proof-of-concept trial using new Integrated Access Backhaul technology to deploy Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband service, eliminating the need to wait for fiber installations. Fiber-optic cables, which serve as the circulatory system of a network to transfer data between cell sites and the network’s core, are critical in wireless networks, and Verizon has bet big on fiber. In fact, Verizon has invested billions of dollars acquiring fiber assets and building out our multi-purpose fiber footprint. Still, working through local regulations and licensing, and then subsequently installing fiber can have very long lead times. So Verizon and Ericsson engineers have found an alternative way of using millimeter wave spectrum for backhaul to accelerate deployment of 5G networks while awaiting the necessary fiber deployment.

“Fiber is the ideal connection between our network facilities. It carries a ton of data, is reliable, and has a long roadmap ahead as far as technological advancements. It is essential. However, this new IAB technology allows us to deploy 5G service more quickly and then fill in the essential fiber at a later time,” said Bill Stone, Vice President of Planning for Verizon.

IAB works by using airlink connections over mmWave spectrum instead of a fiber connection to send data throughout the network. By dynamically allocating a portion of bandwidth for consumers to send their data from their device to the cell tower, and using another portion for that data to be sent from the cell tower back to the core of the network, the need for fiber initially can be circumvented. Then, when fiber is installed at that location, the data being sent back to the rest of the network can be switched over to the fiber and the bandwidth can be redistributed for more capacity for customers.

“Ericsson’s microwave and fiber mobile transport solutions are an important enabler for 5G services,” said Ulf Forssen, Head of Standards & Technology, Development Unit Networks, Ericsson. “This IAB proof of concept demonstrates a complementary solution, enabling faster deployment of the high-quality, high-performance 5G transport needed in a 5G world.”

New resources for first responders
In addition to bringing new cell sites on air more efficiently, this proof-of-concept trial showed that mobile cell sites can also be connected using IAB. This becomes a critical asset for first responders and public safety agencies who need temporary cell coverage for search and rescue operations, disaster recovery efforts or other emergency situations. Verizon owns a fleet of mobile cell sites which are regularly deployed for these situations. However, until recently they have required a fiber connection to carry data, restricting where they can be deployed, or a satellite connection, which are limited and costly. Now, with IAB technology, coupled with portable generators for power, cell sites can be deployed more rapidly and to a wider range of locations.

“When our first responders need us, we will be there with the resources they need to accomplish their mission critical work,” said Stone. “IAB technology gives us many more options to ensure communications resources are where our first responders need them anytime they call on us.”
Verizon brings more 5G to more customers

BASKING RIDGE, N.J. – More 5G in more places for customers on their phone and at home. Continuing its aggressive rollout of its transformational 5G Ultra Wideband service, Verizon today announced customers in parts of Sacramento, Seattle and Pensacola have access to the unprecedented speeds and capabilities of 5G Ultra Wideband in addition to Verizon’s 5G Nationwide service. Customers in parts of Sacramento will also have access to the newest 5G Home equipment. Verizon first launched 5G Home Internet in 2018. The broadband service is ideal for people working remotely and connecting on video conference platforms, like BlueJeans, distance learning, or streaming their favorite tv show or movie.

“Verizon continues its aggressive expansion and technological advancements of 5G Ultra Wideband service, the 21st century platform for innovation,” said Kyle Malady, Verizon’s chief technology officer. “Customers in these cities can now take advantage of revolutionary, game-changing technology, with access to download speeds and bandwidth that can power the future of wireless and home broadband applications and solutions.”

Customers in these cities can now experience ultra-fast wireless speeds, allowing them to download and stream movies and TV shows in seconds, videoconference and collaborate remotely in near real time, and take advantage of new immersive customer experiences never before available wirelessly. Enterprise customers in these markets now have access to the technology that can dramatically accelerate their digital transformation, revolutionizing how they interact with their customers, track inventory, manage operations and engage with their workforce.

Built for industrial and commercial use cases, Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband boasts ultra-low lag and throughputs many times faster than 4G. As the technology continues to mature, it is expected to eventually handle data volumes 100 times larger than today’s capabilities. Verizon’s use of mmWave spectrum, the backbone of 5G Ultra Wideband, is essential to these revolutionary capabilities and is now available to customers in parts of Sacramento, Seattle and Pensacola.

More choices for customers
Customers in these markets will continue to have access to Verizon’s 5G Nationwide network which runs on lower spectrum bands than 5G Ultra Wideband, using an advanced technology called Dynamic Spectrum Sharing (DSS). With Verizon’s 5G Nationwide service, when customers move outside Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband coverage area, their 5G-enabled devices can remain on 5G technology using lower bands of spectrum. This new technology maximizes customers’ experience on the Verizon network by allowing customers to use Verizon’s full portfolio of current spectrum resources to serve all customers. Customers can use Verizon’s wireless network in a variety of ways — from virtual learning to gaming — that requires the ability to allocate spectrum resources in real time.

For 5G Home customers, a fast, reliable home Internet changes everything. Verizon has teamed up with some of the best content providers in the industry to bring customers plenty of options. And for all your streaming needs, customers get a free, Stream TV device, which delivers access to an extensive library of OTT channels, apps and entertainment.
Verizon and Newlab unveil first results of 5G Studio

BROOKLYN, NY - Verizon and Newlab today announced results from the first cohort of companies testing new applications of 5G technology through the organizations' 5G Studio. Earlier this year, Verizon and Newlab launched the 5G Studio to support the development of next-generation industry applications built on Verizon's 5G Ultra Wideband network.

To facilitate the 5G Studio, Verizon deployed 5G Ultra Wideband and mobile edge compute (MEC) at Newlab’s headquarters in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. Leveraging access to 5G capabilities and Newlab’s advanced prototyping resources and product realization support, companies from Newlab’s vast member community and beyond have been able to showcase their technologies to address challenges across industries.

“Verizon seeks to empower innovation using the transformational power of Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wideband and MEC technologies,” said Elise Neel, VP of New Business Incubation at Verizon. “We are proud to collaborate with Newlab through the 5G Studio to enable leaders at the frontier of the fourth industrial revolution to leverage the extraordinary capabilities of 5G and edge computing to help create the products and ecosystems of the future.”

“5G technology and edge computing are ushering in an unprecedented era of innovation, with profound implications for how we will live and work,” said Shaun Stewart, CEO of Newlab. “Earlier this year, we proudly established the 5G Studio with Verizon, a collaboration intended to harness the immense potential of 5G advancements by providing critical support to companies applying technology to transform industry and society. The results produced by this year’s incredible cohort of 5G Studio companies is a testament to the enormous breadth of these solutions, to the cohort companies’ visions, and to the efficacy of Newlab’s Innovation Studio model in empowering entrepreneurial innovation.”

The following are the 5G Studio’s first cohort of startups, along with a description of each company’s 5G application and test results:

Exyn Technologies

- Company Description: Exyn Technologies is a leader in intelligent autonomy with ExynAI for robotic systems. First commercialized on unmanned aerial vehicles, the platform-agnostic, self-contained technology enables safe data acquisition for digitally starved industries and GPS-denied environments at the press of a button.

- 5G Application: Exyn has leveraged 5G to provide near-real-time persistent data streams that weren't possible on 4G networks. 5G will unleash Exyn’s robotic autonomy and data collection in traditionally communications-challenged environments.

Ghost Robotics

- Company Description: Ghost Robotics is revolutionizing legged robotics and the market for highly-agile teleoperated and autonomous unmanned ground vehicles (UGV™) for military, homeland, public safety, and enterprise applications.

- 5G Application: With 5G, Ghost Robotics has established robot-to-robot communication without external intervention to deploy fully autonomous robots while boosting Ghost Robotics’ performance, reliability, and efficiency.

Vecna Robotics

- Company Description: Vecna is a provider of Autonomous Mobile Robots. Vecna’s platform, Pivotal™, integrates with warehouse management systems to maximize throughput, efficiency, and human-robot collaboration.

- 5G Application: With 5G, Vecna has demonstrated a streamlined cloud-based architecture and deployed systems more rapidly, reliably teleoperated continuously and at scale using VR, and processed non-critical functions and machine learning in the cloud.

Phantom Auto

- Company Description: Phantom Auto offers safety technology designed to remotely control and easily navigate autonomous vehicles through a long-range teleoperation platform.

- 5G Application: By increasing total network bandwidth availability, reducing baseline network latency, and enhancing network security and control, 5G has helped Phantom Auto offer new features to address customers' network constraints as they scale their unmanned operations.

Ponto Care

- Company Description: Ponto Care is a Medical Exam Delivery Service that enables exams and medical consultations anywhere by bringing the exam kit to the patient and broadcasting live to a doctor via AR.

- 5G Application: Ponto Care has leveraged 5G to enable doctors to remotely supervise and guide complex exams in near-real-time and high definition, allowing them to deliver comprehensive and safe care to patients that don't have easy access to well-equipped exam rooms.

FOAM

- Company Description: FOAM is a blockchain-based network for crowdsourced maps and decentralized location services, including secure location verification and localization for IoT devices and product tracking from supplier to customer.

5G Application: FOAM has authenticated locations of various objects on blockchain in near-real-time without sensors while addressing privacy concerns by utilizing 5G mobile edge compute to run an Ethereum client that connects to the blockchain.
Verizon accelerates 5G network deployment

Going forward more of our content will be permanently logged via blockchain technology—enabling us to provide greater transparency with authoritative verification on all changes made to official releases.

Learn more
BASKING RIDGE, NJ -- Verizon continues to expand 5G Home Internet service across the country. Beginning today, customers in parts of Houston will have access to enhanced 5G Home service. The super fast Internet is perfect for those who are working from home, homeschooling kids, binging content or powering a smart home. Recently Verizon expanded 5G Home service to Detroit and enhanced service in Indianapolis and Los Angeles. By the end of 2020, 5G Home Internet will be available in 10 cities nationwide. 5G Home availability can be found here: verizonwireless.com/5g/home.

New Network trials will accelerate 5G Home and mobile deployment to more places
Verizon recently partnered with Pivotal Commware, Inc., a Verizon Ventures portfolio company, to conduct trials in Dearborn, Michigan that improve 5G coverage and performance for residents and visitors by strategically placing intelligent repeaters to enhance and boost Verizon’s 5G Ultra Wide Band signal.

“Compared to lower spectrum bands, 5G over mmWave offers far more speed and throughput, is more energy efficient, experiences less signal interference over the air, and has a much greater capacity for expansive scalability,” said Kevin Smith, Vice President of Network Planning for Verizon. “As we’ve known since our very early trials, high band spectrum provides more limited coverage from macro cells. Introducing repeaters like the ones we are trialing from Pivotal will help us expand the footprint of our new 5G Ultra Wide Band network and provide another tool in the toolbox for robust network design.”

A network repeater takes signals from nearby cell sites, amplifies the signals from those sites and retransmits them to previously underserved areas. Pivotal’s solution is an innovative way to efficiently enhance the design of the network and improve service in hard to reach areas.

The trials in Dearborn focus on providing coverage to larger, multi-unit dwellings such as apartments or dormitories with multiple buildings and floors where repeaters are particularly helpful. By installing repeaters between the cell site and the location, the 5G signal can be cost-effectively retransmitted to cover additional areas. Repeaters are small, consume less power than a small cell or macro site and do not require a fiber connection. This makes them a lower cost, quicker path to supplementing traditional cell sites.

“The enhancement of our 5G Home service and Pivotal’s repeater technology are the latest examples of accelerating our 5G network deployment to more quickly deliver the experience our customers are hungry for,” said Smith.
‘Speed of Thought’ documentary highlights first wave of 5G visionaries

“Speed of Thought” documentary follows innovators exploring potential of 5G Ultra Wideband-enabled solutions in healthcare, public safety, education and transportation

Film premieres today at TechCrunch Disrupt and will be available tomorrow on Amazon Prime Video, Peacock and Fios on Demand

NEW YORK, NY (September 15, 2020) -- “Speed of Thought” a documentary directed by Emmy-Award winning documentarian, Mila Aung-Thwin, explores how Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband will improve how we live, work and play. The film gives viewers an inside look at how visionaries are using advanced connectivity to tackle some of society’s biggest challenges and working on solutions that put humanity at the center of this next chapter of innovation.

From a robotic medical device that could enable doctors to perform minimally invasive heart interventions on patients thousands of miles away, to a mask that could someday allow firefighters to see through smoke, and an augmented reality learning experience that immerses students in the history of civil rights, each story within the film focuses on passionate creators exploring ways 5G will make us smarter, safer, and more compassionate.

“Consumers have a lot of questions about what 5G is and the impact it will have,” said Diego Scotti, Chief Marketing Officer, Verizon. “The truth is, 5G is going to change everything. Using this type of longform content as an educational tool gives ‘Speed of Thought’ a critical role in helping consumers understand 5G and its societal impact.”

The documentary will premiere today at TechCrunch Disrupt to an audience of entrepreneurs and tech leaders who are shaping the future of business and disruptive technology. The film will be available September 16 on Amazon Prime Video, Peacock and Fios on Demand.

“We are sitting on the cusp of the next industrial revolution and have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to completely reimagine our future,” said Tami Erwin, CEO, Verizon Business. “The innovators featured within ‘Speed of Thought’ are forging the way for life saving technology and societal advancement. There’s never been a more important time in the history of our world to innovate and build a future that’s more safe, inclusive and accessible to all.”

Saving lives in a heartbeat
Doug Teany, Chief Operating Officer at Corindus, and Dr. Ryan Madder, Interventional Cardiologist at Spectrum Health, demonstrate how Corindus’ robotic device could harness the low latency of 5G Ultra Wideband to enable a doctor to perform a robotic-assisted vascular intervention from thousands of miles away. Together, they perform the first-ever cross-country simulated telerobotic procedure in an attempt to show that the technology works and can increase access to care and reduce time to treatment for patients.

Cing-THRU smoke
Dr. John Long, Cofounder and Chief Technology Officer at Qwake Technologies is trying to solve a problem that firefighters have faced for hundreds of years: seeing through the smoke. He’s working to create the C-THRU Mask, which he hopes will someday use augmented reality on a 5G UWB connection to allow firefighters to navigate through zero visibility conditions. The mask could also someday allow for AR video capture to be sent back to a command center, ultimately making firefighters more safe and situationally aware.

Immersive learning
Glenn Cantave, Founder and CEO, and Idris Brewster, Founder and Chief Creative Officer of Movers & Shakers NYC are using immersive technology to share the stories of underrepresented communities. They are launching an augmented reality app enabled by 5G Ultra Wideband to connect students from marginalized communities with their cultural histories.

Smarter communities
Natasha Greer, IT Project Manager for the City of Sacramento is a believer that cutting edge technology will build a better future for the citizens of Sacramento. She’s currently launching a test program that uses 5G Ultra Wideband-connected cameras to collect data and adjust traffic flow in hopes to bring the rate of pedestrian accidents down to zero by 2027. Verizon engineer Derek Ohlar is a 5G expert, and is working with the University of Michigan to test a technology that uses 5G Ultra Wideband-connected cameras to help cars detect pedestrians in intersections and avoid collisions.

These innovators are working toward a more safe and connected world using Verizon 5G Ultra Wideband. In addition to watching 5G in action, “Speed of Thought” provides a brief history of wireless connectivity, as well as the importance of low latency and the role it plays in the success of next generation technologies.
T-Mobile 5G Is Fastest Based on New Independent Test

The leader in 5G with America’s largest 5G network now takes the speed crown in multiple third-party reports, too

BELLEVUE, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- The best just got better. T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS), America’s 5G leader with the first and largest nationwide 5G network, is also now the fastest. New independent data from Opensignal, based on real world customer usage from millions of device measurements, shows T-Mobile customers now get the fastest 5G download speeds, fastest 5G upload speeds AND a 5G signal more often than anyone else. Extensive mobile testing from research firm umlaut (formerly P3) across multiple major markets including Chicago, Houston, New York City and Washington DC also shows T-Mobile leading in 5G speed.

This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210125005290/en/

T-Mobile 5G Is Fastest Based on New Independent Test (Graphic: Business Wire)
T-Mobile 5G Is Fastest Based on New Independent Test (Graphic: Business Wire)

“From the word ‘go’, we’ve been the leader in 5G coverage, and now we’re piling on the speed with Ultra Capacity 5G – first in 5G coverage, now first in 5G speed,” said Neville Ray, President of Technology at T-Mobile. “Last year we blanketed the country in 5G, and now we’re layering on the capacity and speed. We closed out 2020 with over 100 million people covered with our Ultra Capacity 5G and we will extend this deployment nationwide by the end of 2021. THIS is how you build the best 5G network in the country, and we are just getting started.”

T-Mobile Widens Its Lead with Ultra Capacity 5G

T-Mobile is America’s 5G leader, delivering the fastest 5G speeds in more places. With the first and largest nationwide 5G network, T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G covers more than 280 million people across nearly 1.6 million square miles – offering 2.5x more geographic coverage than AT&T and nearly 4x more than Verizon. With Sprint now part of T-Mobile, the Un-carrier is widening its lead, using dedicated spectrum to bring customers with capable devices download speeds of around 300 Mbps and peak speeds up to 1 Gbps. The Un-carrier's Ultra Capacity 5G already reaches more than 1,000 cities and towns and covers 106 million people, 50x more than Verizon covers with Ultra Wideband.

Opensignal’s independent reports and insights are based on measurements of real experience. Its approach relies solely upon billions of device measurements shared by millions of real users every day – recorded in all the places where people actually live, work and travel.

Additional independent reports also confirm that T-Mobile 5G is #1 in speed and availability. Recent tests by umlaut in Chicago, Houston, New York City and Washington, D.C. found T-Mobile had the fastest average 5G download and upload speeds. Average download speeds for T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G clocked in at 218 Mbps across the four cities and reached a blazing 315 Mbps in Washington, D.C. As for availability, overall T-Mobile 5G availability across the four cities was more than 90%. Testers on average spent 49% of time connected to T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G and just 5% of time connected to Verizon’s Ultra Wideband 5G.

“T-Mobile from the beginning has taken a differentiated strategic approach to 5G, first building a low-band foundation with broad coverage, and then adding a layer of deep capacity and speed with mid-band 5G,” said Anshel Sag, Senior Analyst with Moor Insights and Strategy. “We are now starting to see the results pay off in the two areas customers care about most – coverage and speed. At the current pace T-Mobile is building out these two crucial 5G bands, we expect its lead will continue into the foreseeable future."

The Un-carrier’s Ultra Capacity 5G is the very best kind of 5G with its ability to deliver both broad coverage and fast speeds. It brings game-changing performance to more people across the country than anyone else. Other wireless companies provide fast 5G speeds at the expense of coverage, with service only available in small pockets of some cities. But T-Mobile is building 5G using dedicated airwaves to deliver both coverage and speed to create a truly transformative 5G network capable of driving innovation across the country.

For more information on T-Mobile’s network, visit T-Mobile.com/coverage. Follow T-Mobile’s Official Twitter Newsroom @TMobileNews to stay up to date with the latest company news.

Opensignal Awards – USA: 5G User Experience Report January 2021, based on independent analysis of mobile measurements recorded during the period September 16 – December 14, 2020 © 2021 Opensignal Limited.

Ultra Capacity 5G includes dedicated mid- and/or high-band 5G signals & covers hundreds of cities and millions of people, with more added all the time. “As fast as Wi-Fi” claim based on analysis by T-Mobile of Speedtest Intelligence® data from Ookla® U.S. median 5G T-Mobile results compared to mobile wi-fi results from cities with 2.5GHz speeds for September - November 2020. 2.5GHz available only in select cities (see t-mobile.com/5Glayers). Ookla trademarks used under license and reprinted with permission. 5G coverage not available in some areas. Some uses may require certain plan or feature; see T-Mobile.com.​
T-Mobile, Georgia Tech and Curiosity Lab Team Up to Fuel 5G Innovation in Drones, Autonomous Vehicles,

New 5G Connected Future incubator program will support growth and development of 5G entrepreneurs and startups

BELLEVUE, Wash. & ATLANTA--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) and Curiosity Lab at Peachtree Corners, in collaboration with the Georgia Institute of Technology, today announced the creation of the 5G Connected Future incubator program designed to support the growth and development of entrepreneurs and startups as they work to build the next big thing in 5G.

This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210217005610/en/

The new 5G incubator is located in the city of Peachtree Corners’ 500-acre smart city technology park, a living lab powered by T-Mobile 5G where more than 8,000 people live or work. The facility features a 25,000-square-foot Innovation Center and 3-mile autonomous vehicle test track. T-Mobile has deployed its Extended Range 5G and Ultra Capacity 5G network across the park, enabling developers to build solutions in a real-world environment. Here developers will build and test new 5G use cases such as autonomous vehicles, robotics, industrial drone applications, mixed reality training and entertainment, remote medical care, personal health and fitness wearables, and more.

“What a match-up! America’s leading 5G network, the brilliant minds of Georgia Tech and the most advanced living lab in the country – now that’s a powerhouse combination,” said John Saw, EVP of Advanced & Emerging Technologies at T-Mobile. “We cannot wait to see the innovation that occurs as entrepreneurs and developers build the next big thing in 5G backed by these world-class resources.”

The new incubator, managed in collaboration with Georgia Tech’s Advanced Technology Development Center (ATDC), is an expansion of the T-Mobile Accelerator and part of the Un-carrier’s efforts to fuel 5G innovation. T-Mobile supports numerous initiatives to help startups and entrepreneurs develop, test, and bring to market groundbreaking new 5G products and services. T-Mobile Accelerator is an award-winning program founded in 2014 that originated in the smart city corridor of Kansas City.

Companies participating in the 5G Connected Future program will work directly with technology and business leaders at T-Mobile Accelerator, Georgia Tech and Curiosity Lab as they build, test, and bring to market new products and services that unleash the potential of T-Mobile 5G. ATDC is a globally recognized technology incubator. The 5G Connected Future vertical is the fourth of its kind at ATDC, and follows other targeted programs in health, retail and financial technologies.

“In addition to the normal startup concerns, entrepreneurs in the 5G space face a unique set of challenges such as regulatory issues at the state and local levels, network security, and integration testing,” said ATDC Director John Avery.

ATDC brings a unique framework that combines its startup curriculum, coaching, connections, and community, as well as direct access to Georgia Tech resources, research expertise, and student talent, to help entrepreneurs learn, launch, scale, and succeed. In this effort, ATDC will offer programming, recruit and evaluate startups, and hire staff to manage the vertical in Peachtree Corners.

“This collaboration is a great opportunity for ATDC and Georgia Tech, the city of Peachtree Corners and Curiosity Lab, and T-Mobile, a Fortune 50 company, to create a unique collection to work with these companies, refine their ideas into scalable companies, and bring these solutions to market more quickly,” Avery said.

Such a partnership underscores “Georgia Tech’s commitment to enabling tomorrow’s technology leaders, which remains as strong as when ATDC was founded 41 years ago,” said Chaouki T. Abdallah, Georgia Tech’s executive vice president for research. “Innovation cannot take place in a vacuum, which is why entrepreneurs and startups require the knowledge and resources provided through partnerships such as ours.”

“The City of Peachtree Corners and Curiosity Lab continue to affirm our commitment to technology innovation through programs, partnerships and engagements with industry leaders such as T-Mobile and Georgia Tech,” said Betsy Plattenburg, executive director of Curiosity Lab. “These two organizations were instrumental in the launch of Curiosity Lab, and our continued collaboration will create opportunities for the next generation of intelligent mobility and smart city entrepreneurs.”

T-Mobile 5G, A Platform for Innovation

T-Mobile is America’s 5G leader, with the fastest and largest nationwide 5G network. T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G covers more than 280 million people across nearly 1.6 million square miles – more geographic coverage than AT&T and Verizon combined. With Sprint now part of T-Mobile, the Un-carrier is widening its lead, using dedicated spectrum to bring customers with capable devices download speeds of around 300 Mbps and peak speeds up to 1 Gbps.

With its supercharged 5G network as the foundation, T-Mobile is working to fuel 5G innovation and build the 5G ecosystem. The Un-carrier collaborates with universities and standards bodies to support 5G research and development. In addition to running the award-winning T-Mobile Accelerator, it also operates the T-Mobile Ventures investment fund and is a co-founder of the 5G Open Innovation Lab.

Startups interested in joining the 5G Connected Future program can apply here.
T-Mobile 5G Covers large areas— • 1 million+ square miles. 5,000+ cities & towns • 200m+ people. Reaches across the country, into rural America. Works indoor and out. Doesn’t charge more for 5G access. Making nationwide 5G accessible to everyone, including prepaid.

5G from the Other Guys. Verizon covers parts of 18 cities and a few sport venues
(30 cities by end of year)
AT&T will offer 5G to consumers in 5 cities in the coming weeks
(currently in parts of 21 cities for business customers). Confined to parts of some cities. Verizon 5G blocked by things like walls, windows and leaves. Verizon charges more
AT&T forces customers onto most expensive plans. Verizon charges prepaid customers more
AT&T 5G only available on most expensive postpaid plans.
Get Samsung’s Latest 5G Superphone for FREE on T-Mobile, the Nation’s Largest 5G Network

BELLEVUE, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- Today, T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) announced the Samsung Galaxy S21 5G, Galaxy S21+ 5G and Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G are all coming to the Un-carrier and new and existing customers can get one for FREE with trade-in. All three new smartphones can unlock next-level network technology that ONLY T-Mobile is delivering to customers in the U.S.: standalone 5G and 5G carrier aggregation. Samsung customers will be able to tap into the only nationwide standalone 5G network for more 5G coverage than other networks, and will be among the first to unleash 5G carrier aggregation on the Un-carrier’s nationwide 5G network — meaning better performance, more speed and more coverage for these devices. And of course, all three superphones can tap into T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G for nationwide coverage and Ultra Capacity 5G for super-fast speeds.


As the nation’s 5G coverage leader, T-Mobile isn’t stopping at best. To mark the launch of these powerful new smartphones at the Un-carrier, T-Mobile is expanding its nationwide 5G network, across nearly 1.6 million square miles with Extended Range 5G. And, T-Mobile continues to light up Ultra Capacity 5G across the U.S. — already reaching more than 1,000 cities and towns — and bringing super-fast 5G speeds to more people than anyone else!

The Un-carrier is bringing some next-level DEALS to new and existing customers:

“These powerful new phones deserve the largest 5G network in the country — T-Mobile’s,” said Mike Sievert, CEO of T-Mobile. “Samsung’s latest smartphones unlock next-level 5G available only from the Un-carrier. On top of that, we’re giving everyone a chance to get a FREE Galaxy S21, making it easier for anyone to experience America’s largest 5G network.”

Next level 5G

All three of these smartphones are ready to light up T-Mobile’s advanced network capabilities like 5G carrier aggregation and standalone 5G. T-Mobile recently pulled off the world’s first 5G standalone (SA) data session with New Radio Carrier Aggregation (NR CA) — and now these new Samsung smartphones will be among the first to unleash the capability for consumers, which T-Mobile plans to dramatically expand in availability this year. Right now, customers typically experience game-changing 5G speeds on T-Mobile’s network by accessing individual 5G spectrum bands one at a time. But NR CA takes 5G to the next level, enabling T-Mobile to combine different 5G spectrum bands for customers, boosting speed and performance even more. And it’s only available at T-Mobile.

Growing 5G Leadership

T-Mobile is America’s 5G coverage leader with the largest 5G network and fast 5G speeds in more places than any other wireless provider. T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G now covers 280 million people across nearly 1.6 million square miles. And with Sprint now part of T-Mobile, the Un-carrier is widening its lead, lighting up Ultra Capacity 5G across the country and bringing fast 5G speeds to more places than anyone else. Ultra Capacity 5G is delivering average speeds of 300 Mbps with peaks approaching 1 Gbps and is now available in more than 1,000 cities and towns, covering more than 106 million people! And at T-Mobile, 5G access is included at no extra charge in all smartphone plans.

Samsung Galaxy S21 line of 5G smartphones

TLDR?Watch T-Mobile’s unboxing video here to check out what these new superphones can do.

Plus, all of these smartphones are the perfect match to the new Samsung Galaxy Buds Pro coming to T-Mobile stores on January 14. And T-Mobile customers who pick up any Samsung smartphone can get 50% off any of the Samsung Galaxy Buds!

All that Un-carrier Value

Switching to T-Mobile? With T-Mobile Essentials, customers get unlimited talk, text and 5G data on America’s largest 5G network — and save 20 percent on their plan over “the other big guys” with two or more lines. Plus, they’ll get loads of Un-carrier perks like weekly free stuff and discounts from T-Mobile Tuesdays, an unparalleled set of free tools to protect from scams and unwanted robocalls with Scam Shield and when they need it, the most awarded customer care in wireless with a dedicated Team of Experts.

For more information on the latest Samsung Galaxy 5G devices at T-Mobile, head here. For more information on T-Mobile’s 5G network, visit: www.t-mobile.com/coverage/coverage-map.

Follow T-Mobile’s Official Twitter Newsroom @TMobileNews to stay up-to-date with the latest company news.

If you cancel wireless service before receiving 24 bill credits, you may owe up to the full value of your device (e.g., $799.99 – S21 5G 128 GB); if cancelling your account you can contact us first to instead make discounted monthly balance payments. Limited time offers; subject to change. Qualifying service required. $10 SIM card, and, in stores & on customer service calls, $20 assisted or upgrade support charge may be required. May not be combinable with some offers or discounts. Up to $800 via trade-in credit and bill credits; must be active and in good standing to receive credits; allow 2 bill cycles. Free w/ Trade: Max 4/account. BOGO: 2+ total lines required. If you’ve cancelled lines in past 90 days, reactivate them first. Galaxy Buds: Phone & Buds must be purchased on same day & account. Ultra Capacity 5G includes dedicated mid- and/or high-band 5G signals. T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G covers hundreds of cities and millions of people, with more added all the time; see T-Mobile.com/5Glayers. 5G coverage not available in some areas. Some uses may require certain plan or feature; see T-Mobile.com. Samsung: Display measurements are diagonal, and actual viewable area is less due to rounded corners and camera hole. Charger and S Pen sold separately.
Motorola one 5G ace Lands at Metro by T-Mobile

BELLEVUE, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) today announced that the new Motorola one 5G ace is available today at Metro by T-Mobile, with availability at T-Mobile to follow. This marks the first Motorola 5G device in Metro’s lineup and it’s rolling out a sweet promotion to top it off: Switchers can get the new 5G smartphone for just under $20 bucks.

And of course, Metro customers get full access to T-Mobile’s nationwide 5G network – America’s first, largest AND now fastest – and its advanced LTE network covering 99% of Americans. The latest Motorola 5G smartphone taps into both T-Mobile’s advanced LTE network AND lights up T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G for nationwide coverage and Ultra Capacity 5G for ultra-fast 5G speeds.

T-Mobile is America’s 5G leader, delivering the fastest 5G speeds in more places. With the first and largest nationwide 5G network, T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G covers more than 280 million people across nearly 1.6 million square miles – offering 2.5x more geographic coverage than AT&T and nearly 4x more than Verizon. With Sprint now part of T-Mobile, the Un-carrier is widening its lead, using dedicated spectrum to bring customers with capable devices download speeds of around 300 Mbps and peak speeds up to 1 Gbps. The Un-carrier’s Ultra Capacity 5G already reaches more than 1,000 cities and towns and covers 106 million people, 50x more than Verizon covers with Ultra Wideband.

To get a Motorola one 5G ace for $19.99 and tap into all that 5G goodness, simply switch to Metro and show an ID for verification. Not new to Metro? Current customers looking to add a line can get it for $89.99, no port-in or ID verification required (FRP: $279.99). These deals will only last a short time, available in Metro by T-Mobile locations nationwide, click here to find the nearest available store.

The Motorola one 5G ace features a 6.7” FHD+ display and a triple rear camera system featuring a 48MP main rear camera. It also comes packed with a massive 5,000 mAh battery to help stay connected for over two days on a single charge. To see it in action, check out the unboxing video, here.

For more information, go here or visit metrobyt-mobile.com. Follow T-Mobile’s Official Twitter Newsroom @TMobileNews to stay up to date with the latest company news.

$19.99 plus sales tax and activation fee. Offer available in-store only. Fastest according to Opensignal Awards – USA: 5G User Experience Report January 2021, based on independent analysis of average speeds from mobile measurements recorded during the period September 16 – December 14, 2020 © 2021 Opensignal Limited. 5G: Some uses may require certain plan or feature; see T-Mobile.com. Ultra Capacity 5G includes dedicated mid- and/or high-band 5G signals.

All battery life claims are approximate and based on the median user tested across a mixed use profile (which includes both usage and standby time) under optimal network conditions. Actual battery performance will vary and depends on many factors including signal strength, network and device settings, temperature, battery condition, and usage patterns.

See Ya Speed Bumps. T-Mobile Unleashes 5G with New Magenta MAX Plan

America’s 5G leader delivers another first. Magenta MAX sets a new bar in wireless — the first and only 5G consumer smartphone plan that can’t slow you down based on how much data you use.

New Zero Cost to Switch deal means you can bring your phone and switch for free.

BELLEVUE, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS):

What’s the news: In another 5G first, T-Mobile is unleashing the capacity of America’s largest and fastest 5G network with the new Magenta MAX, delivering unlimited Premium Data — both 4G LTE and 5G on your smartphone, so you can’t be slowed down based on how much you use. Plus, with T-Mobile’s new Zero Cost to Switch deal, AT&T and Verizon customers can get up to $650 and pay zero device switching costs when they bring their own phones.

Why it matters: Today’s wireless plans are built for limited-capacity 4G networks. Magenta MAX is the first plan built to take full advantage of 5G’s capacity and speed.

Who it’s for: Everyone who is tired of hearing what a 5G network can do and is ready to experience it.

T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) is un-leashing 5G like no one else. Introducing Magenta MAX, the first and only 5G smartphone plan built to show what a truly powerful 5G network can do for consumers. Magenta MAX delivers unlimited Premium Data — 4G and 5G — on your smartphone. That means you can’t be slowed down based on how much you use. Plus, Magenta MAX is made for video streaming with UHD (ultra-high definition) streaming up to 4K resolution and Netflix on Us on all MAX plans, now including single line customers. And Magenta MAX comes with the industry’s most generous smartphone mobile hotspot at 40GB of high-speed data included for consumers! Simply put, Magenta MAX sets a new bar in wireless, with the best benefits at a better price than other premium plans!

Legacy smartphone plans are built for lower capacity 4G LTE networks, so Verizon, AT&T and even T-Mobile’s unlimited plans allow providers to lower your network priority if you’ve used a massive amount of data, which means that you might hit speed bumps if the network gets congested. Verizon and AT&T market this as “Premium Data” and give most customers 50GB. But, there’s nothing premium about paying more for fast 5G that’s only in “some parts of some cities.”* Now we’re in the 5G era, and T-Mobile has lit up the highest-capacity 5G network available — a network so powerful it can start unleashing the power of 5G to deliver unlimited Premium Data.

Just to 5G flex, T-Mobile is also upgrading the core Magenta plan with double the Premium Data, from 50GB to 100GB, and nearly double the high-speed smartphone mobile hotspot data, from 3GB to 5GB. All for no additional cost. Existing Magenta and Magenta Plus customers can easily upgrade and keep current device or line promos, too!

For the millions who just got a shiny new 5G smartphone … but are stuck on Carrier plans built for 4G, T-Mobile is launching a new Zero Cost to Switch deal. Bring that new 5G phone to T-Mobile, get up to $650 per line to pay it off and there are zero device switching costs. Keep your phone, switch without the switching costs AND unleash 5G on the nation's largest and fastest 5G network. Win. Win. Win.

“We just joined forces with Sprint, and we’re already America’s 5G coverage and speed leader. Magenta MAX is just a first taste of what our network capacity allows us to do!” said T-Mobile CEO Mike Sievert. “When you’re a heavy data user with a super-fast 5G smartphone, you don’t want to be hit with speed bumps. It’s like having a Ferrari and being forced to drive it in the school zone. Well, now it’s time to open ‘er up on the wide open magenta road! And we are just getting started. Buckle up!”

“5G can deliver more data, faster, but consuming more, faster can quickly run afoul of rules found in plans built for 4G networks,” says Jason Leigh, Research Manager, 5G and Mobile Services Research at IDC. “Redesigning the traditional wireless service plan to take advantage of what 5G can do will create customer enthusiasm for a truly meaningful 5G experience."

Magenta MAX takes the place of Magenta Plus and launches February 24 for consumers and small businesses. Get unlimited talk, text and unlimited Premium Data — 4G and 5G — on your smartphone. So even if you use 200GB or more, you can’t be slowed down based on how much data you use. Plus, Magenta MAX is stacked with new and favorite Un-carrier extras:

Netflix on Us – now for single lines and family plans
unlimited UHD streaming at up to 4K UHD resolution
40GB of high-speed smartphone mobile hotspot data (and unlimited 3G speeds after that) – the industry’s best for consumers
free thank you gifts and discounts on T-Mobile Tuesdays
unlimited Gogo in-flight texting and Wi-Fi all flight long
free texting and data in 210 countries and destinations
unlimited talk, text and data in Mexico and Canada with up to 5GB of high-speed data
free Scam Shield Premium protection, including free Scam Block and Caller ID
All for the same price as Magenta Plus, just $57 per line per month for three lines with autopay and monthly taxes and fees included. But right now, get Magenta MAX for just $47 per line per month for three lines with autopay for a limited time.

And Magenta MAX isn’t just the best plan at T-Mobile. It’s the best plan in wireless, loaded with features at a great price that saves hundreds compared to other premium plans. Right now, Verizon customers can save over $650 a year and AT&T customers can save over $475 a year — and even more because monthly taxes and fees aren’t included.

Zero Cost to Switch

Now it’s easier to say goodbye to Verizon and AT&T than ever before. T-Mobile’s new Zero Cost to Switch deal is designed for people who just upgraded to a super-fast 5G smartphone but are stuck on Carrier plans built for 4G and that limit their access to 5G. With Zero Cost to Switch, consumers and small businesses can …

switch to the Un-carrier,

AND keep their eligible phones and phone numbers, photos, contacts, favorite apps and more

AND T-Mobile will pay it off (up to $650 per line on eligible phones via virtual prepaid card)

AND T-Mobile will waive the costs associated with switching over their devices.

But, if you don’t have a 5G smartphone yet and want to upgrade, you can get a new 5G phone on us via 24 monthly bill credits when you pick up your new phone on T-Mobile’s interest-free Equipment Installment Plan and trade in an eligible device.

Largest & Fastest 5G Network

T-Mobile is America’s 5G leader with the largest and fastest 5G network. T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G covers 280 million people across 1.6 million square miles — that’s nearly 2.5x more coverage than AT&T and nearly 4x more than Verizon! With Sprint now part of T-Mobile, the Un-carrier is widening its lead, using dedicated spectrum to bring customers with capable devices download speeds of around 300 Mbps in many places and peak speeds up to 1 Gbps. T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G already reaches 2,400 cities and towns and covers over 50x more people than Verizon covers with Ultra Wideband. So, what do you do when you are the largest and fastest? Let people experience 5G like no one else can, of course.

For more information on T-Mobile’s network, visit t-mobile.com/coverage and starting Feb 24, for more information on new Magenta MAX, and all of T-Mobile’s plans visit t-mobile.com/cell-phone-plans . For more information on T-Mobile’s Zero Cost to Switch deal, visit https://www.t-mobile.com/offers/switch-to-t-mobile-from-verizon-or-att.

And as always, follow T-Mobile’s Official Twitter Newsroom @TMobileNews to stay up to date with the latest company news.

* Source: actual Verizon commercials

Activate up to 4K UHD streaming on capable device, or video typically streams at 480p. Unlimited while on our network. After high-speed tethering allotment, unlimited on our network at max 3G speeds. Fastest 5G network per Opensignal Awards based on average speeds – USA: 5G User Experience Report January 2021. Some uses may require certain plan or feature; see T-Mobile.com. Qualifying credit required for pricing/offers. Zero Cost to Switch: Qualifying port-in, 90+ days with device & AT&T/VZN and timely redemption required. Virtual card typically takes 15 days. No cash access & expires in 6 months. Card issued by Sunrise Banks N.A., Member FDIC. T-Mobile will cover $10 SIM & $20 assisted support charges. $47/line: With monthly bill credits. Credits may take up to 2 bill cycles; credits will stop if you cancel any lines. Limit 1 offer per account. May not be combinable with some offers or discounts. $5 more/line without AutoPay. Free iPhone:If you cancel wireless service before 24 credits, credits may stop and remaining balance on required finance agreement may be due; if cancelling your account you can contact us first to instead continue making discounted monthly balance payments. Add’l line required. Tax on pre-credit price due at sale. Up to $830 via trade-in credit and bill credits. Must be active and in good standing to receive credits; allow 2 bill cycles. Max 4/account. ​
T-Mobile Brings Ultra Capacity 5G to Miami U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)

What’s the news: T-Mobile has deployed its super-fast Ultra Capacity 5G in and around the Miami VA Healthcare System — another milestone in its long-standing partnership with the VA to expand healthcare access to Veterans.

Why it matters: The future of healthcare is now! With 5G speeds, medical teams can improve critical telehealth services and provide more efficient care across the facility with instant wireless access to large amounts of patient information.

Who it’s for: Medical staff and veterans served by the VA.

BELLEVUE, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) today announced it has deployed Ultra Capacity 5G at the Miami Veterans Affairs (VA) Healthcare System, bringing incredible 5G speed and performance to medical staff and patients with capable devices. T-Mobile currently provides in-building 4G LTE wireless connectivity across more than 50 VA Healthcare Systems with more to come this year. Today, thanks to a new custom 5G installation — the first T-Mobile has deployed at any hospital — doctors and nurses can tap into America’s largest and fastest 5G network throughout the facility in Miami.

This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210225005702/en/

T-Mobile Brings Ultra Capacity 5G to Miami U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Hospital (Photo: Business Wire)
T-Mobile Brings Ultra Capacity 5G to Miami U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Hospital (Photo: Business Wire)

In-building 5G radios provide T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G coverage in the hospital that can deliver speeds of 300 Mbps (7.5x faster than LTE today) with peaks up to 1 Gbps. And, faster speeds are important when every second counts. Medical teams will be able to quickly access high bandwidth files such as imaging results, labs and medical charts without having to be tethered to a computer. And, this is just the beginning! In the future, 5G will unlock new capabilities that could take healthcare to the next level.

“We set out to do good with our 5G network and right now healthcare is more important than ever. T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G brings healthcare providers the fastest 5G network of any provider enabling them to deliver high quality medical care,” said Mike Katz, EVP, T-Mobile for Business. “We are proud to be a long-standing partner of the VA and now the medical teams at the Miami VA Healthcare System can tap into 5G. This is an exciting step towards the future of healthcare made possible by the T-Mobile network.”

T-Mobile works with hundreds of top hospitals and health systems in the U.S., including the VA, to put wireless connectivity in the hands of both medical providers and patients. The Un-carrier collaborated with the VA to provide up to 70,000 lines of wireless service to doctors, nurses and hospital staff across their hospitals and also worked with the VA Secretary's Center for Strategic Partnerships (SCSP) to help enhance access to the VA's telehealth platform, VA Video Connect, to make healthcare more accessible to millions of veterans — providing free unlimited access to online telehealth services. T-Mobile continues to connect a significant number of VA telehealth visits which surged during the pandemic. More than one in four veterans received a portion of their care in the VA via telehealth — that’s a 79% increase in veterans served from the previous year.

“Groundbreaking collaborative partnerships like this play an important role in our success moving forward and we are grateful to T-Mobile for their continued commitment to the partnership with VA,” said Deborah Scher, Executive Advisor to the VA Secretary and leads the VA’s SCSP.

“T-Mobile has a strategic vision aligned with the VA to deliver the best technology giving veterans every advantage in quality care, both on-site and through telehealth appointments,” said David Bezzant, Vice President T-Mobile for Government. “Our partnership with the VA has allowed us to work together to build customized solutions enabling the VA to bring more healthcare services to veterans.”

T-Mobile for Business brings healthcare and enterprise customers 5G that’s better for business. With America’s largest and fastest nationwide 5G network, the Un-carrier brings fast 5G speed to more people and places than any other wireless provider. Extended Range 5G goes beyond cities and extends to rural areas covering 280 million people over 1.6 million square miles.T-Mobile’s unmatched Ultra Capacity 5G can deliver speeds of 300 Mbps and peak speeds up to 1 Gbps giving rise to the convergence of mobility for companies to work more efficiently, drive additional productivity, solve business challenges and ultimately bring best in class advancements to the market and customers.

For more information on T-Mobile's partnership to expand telehealth access for veterans, visit https://www.t-mobile.com/business/resources/articles/va-case-study.

Follow T-Mobile’s Official Twitter Newsroom @TMobileNews to stay up to date with the latest company news.

Opensignal Awards – USA: 5G User Experience Report January 2021, based on independent analysis of average speeds from mobile measurements recorded during the period September 16 – December 14, 2020 © 2021 Opensignal Limited. ​Ultra Capacity 5G includes dedicated mid- and/or high-band 5G signals. T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G covers hundreds of cities and millions of people, with more added all the time; see T-Mobile.com/5Glayers. Capable device required. Some uses may require certain plan or feature; see T-Mobile.com.

About T-Mobile

T-Mobile U.S. Inc. (NASDAQ: TMUS) is America’s supercharged Un-carrier, delivering an advanced 4G LTE and transformative nationwide 5G network that will offer reliable connectivity for all. T-Mobile’s customers benefit from its unmatched combination of value and quality, unwavering obsession with offering them the best possible service experience and undisputable drive for disruption that creates competition and innovation in wireless and beyond. Based in Bellevue, Wash., T-Mobile provides services through its subsidiaries and operates its flagship brands, T-Mobile, Metro by T-Mobile and Sprint. For more information please visit: https://www.t-mobile.com.
REAL, TRANSFORMATIVE 5G REQUIRES A RANGE OF SPECTRUM
• T-Mobile is laying a solid, broad foundation for its 5G network by blanketing the country with 600 MHz low-band spectrum.
• Now that the merger with Sprint is complete, T-Mobile is adding critical depth to the network with 2.5 GHz mid-band spectrum. Mid-band spectrum provides the balance of coverage, capacity and speed that enables a meaningful 5G experience.
• T-Mobile will continue building out 5G in millimeter wave (mmWave), where it makes sense, like dense urban areas. Millimeter wave delivers massive capacity, but only over a very small footprint. It is easily blocked by things like doors, windows, walls, trees and leaves.
• The company’s unique combination of low-, mid- and high-band spectrum makes T-Mobile the only company with the resources to create a transformative network capable of driving innovation across the country, providing people with a 5G network nobody else can match.
5G ON 600MHZ—T-MOBILE’S FARTHEST REACHING SIGNAL
• The Un-carrier’s strongest, most powerful signal reaches farther than its other spectrum to bring 5G to people in nearly 6,000 cities
and towns—including those in rural America—and it brings 5G deep into buildings.
• T-Mobile has fresh 600 MHz spectrum dedicated to 5G. Only the Un-carrier is capable of delivering nationwide 5G without taking spectrum away from other customers.
5G ON 2.5 GHZ—SUPERCHARGING THE NETWORK WITH DEPTH AND SPEED
• With the addition of 2.5 GHz spectrum, T-Mobile has 319 MHz of mid and low-band spectrum nationwide, nearly 2x AT&T and
3x Verizon, which the Un-carrier will deploy to add much needed depth to its nationwide 5G network, increasing capacity and boosting speeds for customers.
• The mid-band spectrum will boost average 5G speeds for customers nationwide up to eight times faster than current LTE in just a few years, and 15 times faster than current LTE over the next six years.
THE NEW T-MOBILE WILL OFFER TRANSFORMATIONAL 5G

Massive Capacity
Over the next six years, our capacity will increase 14x over what we have today.
15x Faster
Our network will be 8x faster than current LTE in just a few years, and 15x faster than current LTE in the next six years.
We already have the largest 5G network, and within the next 6 years we’ll provide 5G to 99% of Americans.
Un-carrier 5G Fact Sheet
T-Mobile has the first, largest, and only nationwide 5G network, covering more people and places than anyone else. No 5G signal goes farther or is more reliable.
T-Mobile to Expand and Advance the Nation’s Largest 5G Network with New 5-Year Agreements

These multi-billion-dollar deals with both Ericsson and Nokia will continue to supercharge T-Mobile’s nationwide 5G network

BELLEVUE, Wash.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- Today, T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) announced five-year, multi-billion-dollar agreements with both Ericsson (NASDAQ: ERIC) and Nokia (NYSE: NOK) to continue advancing and expanding the nation’s largest 5G network. Part of the network investment following last year’s merger with Sprint, these deals enable T-Mobile to add even more 5G coverage, capacity, speed and advanced technical capabilities across all of its spectrum bands.

“T-Mobile already has the largest 5G network in the country,” said Neville Ray, T-Mobile President of Technology. “These agreements with our longstanding 5G partners Nokia and Ericsson will help us take our 5G leadership even further, delivering ever-better experiences for our customers for years to come.”

Building on two decades of partnership, the Un-carrier will work with Ericsson and Nokia to expand its nationwide 5G network for better 5G coverage and future game-changing experiences, and advanced network capabilities like 5G carrier aggregation. T-Mobile launched the world’s first nationwide standalone 5G network last summer, and recently pulled off the world’s first 5G standalone (SA) data session with New Radio Carrier Aggregation (NR CA). T-Mobile is the first and only U.S. provider to combine the power of Extended Range and Ultra Capacity 5G, boosting speed and performance. T-Mobile also plans to add advanced technical capabilities like voice over 5G (VoNR), network slicing, and multi-user massive MIMO to its 5G network.

T-Mobile is already America’s 5G leader with the most advanced 5G network and fast 5G speeds in more places than any other wireless provider. T-Mobile’s Extended Range 5G now covers 280 million people across nearly 1.6 million square miles — that’s more than 2.5x the geographic coverage of AT&T and nearly 4x more than Verizon! And with Sprint now part of T-Mobile, the Un-carrier is widening its lead, lighting up Ultra Capacity 5G across the country and bringing fast 5G speeds to more places than anyone else. Ultra Capacity 5G can deliver average speeds of 300 Mbps with peaks approaching 1 Gbps and is now available in more than 1,000 cities and towns, covering more than 106 million people! That’s 50x more than Verizon covers with Ultra-Wideband! And at T-Mobile, 5G access is included at no extra charge in all smartphone plans.

For more information on T-Mobile’s 5G network, visit: www.t-mobile.com/coverage/coverage-map.

Follow T-Mobile’s Official Twitter Newsroom @TMobileNews to stay up-to-date with the latest company news.

Ultra Capacity 5G includes dedicated mid- and/or high-band 5G signals. T-Mobile’s Ultra Capacity 5G covers hundreds of cities and millions of people, with more added all the time; see T-Mobile.com/5Glayers. Capable device required; coverage not available in some areas. Some uses may require certain plan or feature; see T-Mobile.com.
Un-carrier 5G Fact Sheet
T-Mobile lights up the first nationwide 5G network, first nationwide prepaid 5G with Metro by T-Mobile and first 5G devices that work nationwide, ushering in a new era of 5G accessibility and affordability in the first step toward 5G for All with New T-Mobile. 5G included on all plans at no extra charge
TWO LOW-BAND 5G DEVICES: • OnePlus 7T Pro 5G McLaren • Samsung Galaxy Note10+ 5G
PREPAID CUSTOMERS HAVE ACCESS:
Metro by T-Mobile customers will be able to tap into nationwide 5G ON 600MHZ- T-MOBILE’S FARTHEST REACHING SIGNAL
• T-Mobile is laying a solid, broad foundation for its 5G network by blanketing the country with 600 MHz low-band
spectrum. The Un-carrier’s strongest, most powerful signal reaches farther than its other spectrum to bring 5G to more people—including those in rural America—and it brings 5G deep into buildings.
• T-Mobile has untouched 600 MHz spectrum dedicated to 5G. Only the Un-carrier is capable of launching nationwide 5G without taking spectrum away from other customers.
REAL, TRANSFORMATIVE 5G REQUIRES A RANGE OF SPECTRUM
• Once the merger with Sprint is complete, the New T-Mobile will add critical depth to the network with 2.5 GHz mid-band
spectrum. Mid-band spectrum provides the balance of coverage and capacity that enables a seamless and meaningful 5G experience.
• T-Mobile will continue building out 5G in millimeter wave (mmWave), where it makes sense, like dense urban areas. Millimeter wave delivers massive capacity, but only over a very small footprint. It is easily blocked by things like doors, windows, walls, trees and leaves.
90%
OF RURAL AMERICANS COVERED
AVERAGE BROADBAND DOWNLOAD SPEEDS OF
14X
CAPACITY OF T-MOBILE TODAY
450 Mbps
NATIONWIDE AVERAGE DOWNLOAD SPEEDS
IN-HOME BROADBAND FOR
MILLIONS
INCLUDING UNDERSERVED/ RURAL AMERICA
   100 Mbps+
FOR AT LEAST 90% OF AMERICANS.

Important Additional Information
In connection with the proposed transaction, T-Mobile US, Inc. (“T-Mobile”) has filed a registration statement on Form S-4 (File No. 333-226435),which was declared effective
by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on October 29, 2018, and which contains a joint consent solicitation statement of T-Mobile and Sprint Corporation (“Sprint”), that also constitutes a prospectus of T-Mobile (the “joint consent solicitation statement/prospectus”), and each party will file other documents regarding the proposed transaction with the SEC. INVESTORS AND SECURITY HOLDERS ARE URGED TO READ THE JOINT CONSENT SOLICITATION STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS AND OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE SEC WHEN THEY BECOME AVAILABLE BECAUSE THEY WILL CONTAIN IMPORTANT INFORMATION. The documents filed by T-Mobile may be obtained free of charge at T-Mobile’s website, at www.t-mobile.com, or at the SEC’s website, at www.sec.gov, or from T-Mobile by requesting them by mail at T-Mobile US, Inc., Investor Relations, 1 Park Avenue, 14th Floor, New York, NY 10016, or by telephone at 212-358-3210. The documents filed by Sprint may be obtained free of charge at Sprint’s website, at www.sprint.com, or at the SEC’s website, at www.sec.gov, or from Sprint by requesting them by mail at Sprint Corporation, Shareholder Relations, 6200 Sprint Parkway, Mailstop KSOPHF0302-3B679, Overland Park, Kansas 66251, or by telephone at 913-794-1091.
No Offer or Solicitation
This communication shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any securities, nor shall there be any sale of securities in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such jurisdiction. No offering of securities shall be made except by means of a prospectus meeting the requirements of Section 10 of the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This communication contains certain forward-looking statements concerning T-Mobile, Sprint and the proposed transaction between T-Mobile and Sprint. All statements other than statements of fact, including information concerning future results, are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are generally identified by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “could” or similar expressions. Such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about the benefits of the proposed transaction, including anticipated future financial and operating results, synergies, accretion and growth rates, T-Mobile’s, Sprint’s and
the combined company’s plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, and the expected timing of completion of the proposed transaction. There are several factors which could cause actual plans and results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in forward-looking statements. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the failure
to obtain, or delays in obtaining, required regulatory approvals, and the risk that such approvals may result in the imposition of conditions that could adversely affect the combined company or the expected benefits of the proposed transaction, or the failure to satisfy any of the other conditions to the proposed transaction on a timely basis or at
all; the occurrence of events that may give rise to a right of one or both of the parties to terminate the business combination agreement; adverse effects on the market price of T-Mobile’s or Sprint’s common stock and on T-Mobile’s or Sprint’s operating results because of a failure to complete the proposed transaction in the anticipated timeframe or
at all; inability to obtain the financing contemplated to be obtained in connection with the proposed transaction on the expected terms or timing or at all; the ability of T-Mobile, Sprint and the combined company to make payments on debt or to repay existing or future indebtedness when due or to comply with the covenants contained therein; adverse changes in the ratings of T-Mobile’s or Sprint’s debt securities or adverse conditions in the credit markets; negative effects of the announcement, pendency or consummation
of the transaction on the market price of T-Mobile’s or Sprint’s common stock and on T-Mobile’s or Sprint’s operating results, including as a result of changes in key customer, supplier, employee or other business relationships; significant transaction costs, including financing costs, and unknown liabilities; failure to realize the expected benefits and synergies of the proposed transaction in the expected timeframes or at all; costs or difficulties related to the integration of Sprint’s network and operations into T-Mobile; the risk of litigation or regulatory actions, including the antitrust litigation brought by the attorneys general of certain states and the District of Columbia; the inability of T-Mobile, Sprint or the combined company to retain and hire key personnel; the risk that certain contractual restrictions contained in the business combination agreement during the pendency
of the proposed transaction could adversely affect T-Mobile’s or Sprint’s ability to pursue business opportunities or strategic transactions; effects of changes in the regulatory environment in which T-Mobile and Sprint operate; changes in global, political, economic, business, competitive and market conditions; changes in tax and other laws and regulations; and other risks and uncertainties detailed in the Form S-4, as well as in T-Mobile’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018 and in its subsequent reports on Form 10-Q, including in the sections thereof captioned “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” as well as in its subsequent reports on Form 8-K, all of which are filed with the SEC and available at www.sec.gov and www.t-mobile.com. Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions, which are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in or implied by such forward- looking statements. Given these risks and uncertainties, persons reading this communication are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. T-Mobile assumes no obligation to update or revise the information contained in this communication (whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise), except as required by applicable law.
Demonstrating the improved security of 5G networks

In a suburban lab across from a grocery store, engineers are building a 5G testing site so they can write the book on 5G cybersecurity.

If not a book, they’ll definitely put a detailed document online. It will be a guide to best practices for securing 5G networks – which ultimately will be the safest generation of mobile broadband yet.

AT&T is pleased to be among several companies collaborating on the project with the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence in Rockville, MD. It’s part of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

5G already has standards for cybersecurity set by 3GPP, a global partnership of telecom standards bodies. The NIST project is different. It is working on real-world tests with a group of equipment and software vendors, mobile operators and security service providers. It plans to literally demonstrate and document the strong security than can be achieved in 5G networks.

Here’s an example. As full 5G standards are reached, for the first time, your connection to a cell tower will use an encrypted form of your identity, not your actual subscriber ID. That means hackers pretending to be a cell tower won’t be able to capture your call and location.

NIST will test the encryption as it actually happens. The results will serve as a reference. This should help the many organizations that want to take advantage of 5G’s advanced security along with its faster speeds, lower latency and massive connectivity.

You can read our recent blog post about AT&T and 5G security. We are proud of our leadership in this critical area.

NIST is building its system now, with testing to begin soon. The guide it produces won’t be the sort of thing you browse on your smartphone. But as you browse your grocery list, you’ll be glad it’s been written.
AT&T’s 5G+ now available for customers to experience while attending sporting events and concerts

What’s the news? We’re taking the fan experience to the next level with the introduction of AT&T 5G+ at Oracle Park. 5G+ is our name for 5G delivered using millimeter wave spectrum, which is ideal for high-traffic areas. That means the players on the field won’t be the only ones putting up unprecedented performances

Why is this important? AT&T customers with a compatible device and qualifying plan will now have access to the super-fast speeds and increased connectivity that are ideal for popular venues like Oracle Park.

Who can use this? AT&T 5G+ will enable incredible innovation and unlock immersive experiences – especially when larger public gatherings are permitted once again. AT&T 5G+ will bring faster speeds and greater connectivity to our customers who are enjoying an event at Oracle Park.

In addition to the super-fast speeds of AT&T 5G+ available at Oracle Park1, AT&T 5G offers the Fastest Nationwide 5G Network2 to customers on-the-go or at home in the Bay Area.

Where can I get it? AT&T 5G+ is available in parts of 38 cities across the country. Learn more about AT&T’s 5G network at att.com/5gforyou.

Sheila c.jpg
“Our customers in the Bay Area are going to be blown away by their experience with AT&T’s Nationwide 5G Network. Not only are we seeing great speeds from 5G+, but fans who attend events at Oracle Park will benefit from the immersive experiences that our network will unlock.”

- Sheila Crisostomo, VPGM, AT&T Northern California

Rhonda J.jpg
“At its core, AT&T is about establishing connections. The work our teams have done to bring AT&T 5G+ to Oracle Park is tremendous and it will bring our customers closer to the action on the field and allow them to share the excitement with fans across the country.”

- Rhonda Johnson, President, AT&T California
Sizzlin’ Speeds: AT&T Customers Continue to Experience the Nation’s Fastest 5G Network.

AT&T 5G Speed Tops the Competition in Q4 2020, Based on the Latest Results from Ookla Speedtest

AT&T Hits a Milestone of 2 Consecutive Years with the Overall Fastest Wireless Network in the Nation

What’s the news? AT&T* 5G network speeds beat the competition in Q4 2020, confirming that AT&T customers continue to enjoy the Nation’s Fastest 5G Wireless Network according to the latest results from Ookla® Speedtest.

And that’s not all - we’ve also hit a milestone of the Overall Fastest Wireless Speeds in the nation for 2 consecutive years2 and the Fastest Wireless Network for iPhone since 2019, according to Ookla.

Why is this important? Wireless connectivity continues to be a vital part to our everyday lives and has proven to be even more so in in our current world when we need connection the most. Fast wireless speeds contribute to our customers having a great wireless experience when connecting to what they love most, and it can help speed up things like downloading your favorite HBO Max movie, game or app on the go. Our customers can also celebrate knowing they are on a faster wireless network than subscribers on other carrier networks.

How did we get here? Our customers deserve the best, so we invested billions of dollars in technology investments for our network, and this win is a result of that. This all starts with our employees’ hard work making enhancements to our network despite the challenges that COVID-19 brought to the country. Last year, our network build team thought outside the box to make sure our 5G build plan was able to continue.

“We continue to lead the competition and deliver the speeds our customers need thanks to the dedicated, hard work by our teams,” said Chris Sambar, EVP-Technology Operations. “I am determined we have the best and most innovative engineers in the business.”

Our nationwide 5G network currently reaches Americans in more than 14,000 cities and towns.4 And we haven’t stopped - we continue to densify our nationwide 5G network while also launching new AT&T 5G+ technologies, currently in 38 cities, for communities across the nation.

Where do the speed results come from? Ookla speed results don’t come from a lab. AT&T’s fastest wireless network wins are based on millions of real-world consumers testing speeds daily across the nation on the Ookla Speedtest application.
AT&T Rolls Out Super-Fast 5G+ Across the U.S.

AT&T delivers our customers two flavors of 5G – AT&T 5G, using low-band spectrum, which offers the Fastest Nationwide 5G Network1 to our customers anywhere and AT&T 5G+, which is our name for 5G that delivers super-fast speeds and unprecedented performances via millimeter wave spectrum.

AT&T 5G+ delivers the faster speeds and increased connectivity needed to enable incredible innovation and unlock immersive experiences in high-traffic venues like stadiums, arenas, school campuses, hospitals, entertainment venues and more!

AT&T 5G+ is available in parts of 38 cities in the U.S. as well as in various public and private venues across the country… with more to come!
The Future of AT&T 5G

AT&T’s 5G network reached nationwide coverage in July, but hitting that milestone hasn’t slowed us down. In fact, quite the opposite – we’re now more energized than ever about continuing to expand our 5G footprint (in both sub-6 and millimeter wave (mmWave) technology) to begin helping enable revolutionary new capabilities for businesses and customers alike.

AT&T was the first to introduce mobile 5G service in the U.S. in December 2018, which helped us begin learning how 5G operates in real-world environments before anyone else. And in June, we were the first to launch 5G markets with DSS (Dynamic Spectrum Sharing) technology, which allows us to share the same channel between both 4G and 5G users simultaneously depending on network demand, which in turn creates a nearly seamless experience for consumers.

Now we’re bringing that innovation to the future of 5G experiences.

5G in action

While 5G will certainly be a consumer technology long-term, we’re seeing initial demand being driven primarily by enterprise users. That’s in large part due to mmWave 5G’s low-power, highly precise location and lower-latency factors that, in line-of-sight use cases, are important to how businesses incorporate IoT and other applications into their future workflow. Edge computing is also a unique capability that 5G will enhance moving forward. Here are two of many examples for how we’re putting 5G to use for enterprise.

Smarter manufacturing

Last year, AT&T, Samsung Austin Semiconductor and Samsung Electronics America unveiled the first manufacturing-focused 5G Innovation Zone in America. The research space is designed for AT&T and Samsung to explore ideas and technology over 5G networks for improving manufacturing environments and creating smarter factories.

Adding 5G into the mix here can ultimately enable manufacturers to enhance the scale and volume of data collection, improve process flexibility by eliminating wires and improve the ability to process data in near real time. Increased bandwidth and reduced latency would be a gamechanger in improving efficiency and performance on the production floor and predicting issues before they happen.  Safety also gets a boost as 5G’s future ultra-low latency could help enable critical data to get to emergency responders with nearly no lag or delay.

Bringing you to the edge

AT&T has been working with cloud service providers to add edge compute technology into our network centers as we upgrade them for 5G deployment. And as we continue to bring edge compute technologies live to more markets, we’re excited for the possibilities the technology will enable. Our mmWave 5G enterprise customers are already pursuing this reality, some using on-premise edge compute hardware to trial private 5G networks for their businesses.

Some examples of edge compute use cases in action or in trial include augmented reality experiences for retail stores, lightweight drones that can track themselves and thousands of nearby companions in near-real time, and autonomous cars that have access to nearly-instant data processing capabilities without having to install a mini data center in the trunk.

Software-based network

We have been a vocal proponent and industry leader in making our network more software-centric. Our advances in cloud native virtualization, containerization, and hardware and software disaggregation allowed us to reach our software-based networking goal of 75% prior to the end of 2020. With 5G, we’re working to embed security directly into the design, architecture and functionality of our network, eventually giving us enhanced security that will enable us to protect the network at a global scale.

And now that our 5G network is nationwide, we’re ready to soon deliver a faster, smarter, more secure network to consumers and businesses across the country.

The future, imagined

I’m excited about the possibilities of AT&T 5G and how it will create experiences for consumers and businesses that help make life easier, highly secure, more efficient and more enjoyable. The future is only limited by what can be imagined.
Not just speed: 5G will make several security upgrades

Each time our wireless networks add a new “G” – for generation of technology – we expect good things to get better.

Faster download speeds are the easiest to see. But other areas are quietly improving, including security.

The state of security on 4G LTE is quite good. Here are three areas where 5G should continue to stay ahead of threats as it is fully installed:

More privacy for your identity. You may have read stories about stingrays and other “IMSI catcher” devices that capture phone calls. They are designed to mimic cell towers and trick nearby wireless devices into connecting to them.
This can help someone locate you or intercept your conversation. But only if they can identify you. With 5G, for the first time, your connection will rely completely on an encrypted identity. Your permanent ID won’t be exposed.

Stronger encryption over the air. When your voice and data travels from your device to a cell tower, it stays confidential because it’s scrambled by an algorithm. With 5G, the protection will be getting even stronger.
A more robust form of 128-bit encryption will fully replace a weaker form. (They are both used now.) And within a few years, 256-bit encryption should be the norm.

This will help keep one step ahead of bad guys with big computers. It’s just not practical for them to reassemble your call or message.

Smarter software running the network. 5G will increasingly rely on flexible software from an open community of experts, not on specialized hardware from a single company. Your call or data will be routed through “virtualized” network nodes – switches and hubs that can be moved instantly from one physical computer to another if there’s a problem.
For security, this will reduce the chance that any single equipment supplier or country can have undue influence. It will mean vulnerability patches can be made more quickly and precisely, and problems can be isolated more easily until they’re fixed.

5G has other security benefits, too. It takes advantage of the Mobile Edge. That’s a new and growing capability in the network that is closer to you and reduces delay on mobile applications. As a bonus, it brings threat detection closer to a key source of attacks – devices on the network.

A future 5G benefit may come from a feature called Network Slicing. It recognizes that watching a movie is different than performing remote surgery, and they can be delivered at different service levels. The right security controls could be tailored for each.

Here is the bottom line on security: Faster downloads are great – but there’s more to a new G than speed.
AT&T Enables 5G Roaming for U.S. Customers in Japan

AT&T is First to Enable 5G Roaming for U.S. Customers in Japan
Roaming agreement paired with soon-to-be available 5G roam-capable devices will enable AT&T customers access to 5G network in Japan

AT&T* customers will be the first U.S. mobile customers to have the ability to access 5G in Japan through our international roaming agreement with NTT DOCOMO, Inc. and by using a 5G roam-capable device – the first of which will become available on the AT&T network this week.

The agreement delivers on AT&T’s commitment to keeping its customers connected and providing them with access to 5G – at home and around the globe – as capable devices become available.

“As a longtime industry leader providing global connectivity, we’re evolving the breadth and depth of our global coverage with 5G,” said Susan A. Johnson, executive vice president – Global Connections & Supply Chain, AT&T. “This marks a significant milestone for AT&T and our customers.”

AT&T customers on a wireless plan that includes access to 5G in the U.S. will be able to access 5G in Japan through NTT DOCOMO, Inc., when they use a 5G roam-capable device.

“We’re excited to launch 5G roaming in Japan on NTT DOCOMO, Inc.’s network because of what it means for our customers,” said JR Wilson, vice president – Tower Strategy & Roaming, AT&T. “Our teams never stop innovating, developing and deploying the latest technology to provide our customers with access to a next-generation network – at home and abroad.”

AT&T has historically been a leader in global roaming. So, while the company continues innovating to enable customers with compatible devices to access 5G internationally, those with LTE devices can still expect the same great roaming coverage they’re used to while traveling.
Need for Speed: AT&T Has the Fastest Nationwide 5G Network
AT&T 5G Takes the Title for Fastest Nationwide 5G Network in Q3 2020, Based on the Latest Results from Ookla Speedtest

Just In! AT&T* has the fastest nationwide 5G network for Q3 2020.1 This comes on the heels of the 7th quarter in a row that we’ve also won overall fastest wireless network2 in the nation and fastest wireless network for iPhones3 in Q3 2020, according to the latest results from Ookla® Speedtest®.

We’re proud of our employees and their dedication to provide our customers with the fastest nationwide 5G wireless speeds, especially at a time when wireless connectivity continues to be more important. And, our customers can get excited knowing that they’re enjoying faster nationwide 5G speeds than subscribers on other networks. This win is also a testament to the continued enhancements we’re making to our 5G network for our customers and communities across the nation

WHY DOES THIS MATTER?

Speed matters when it comes to your wireless network. Having fast speeds is important whether you’re downloading your favorite HBO Max show to watch, streaming your favorite music or browsing the internet while at home or on-the-go.

AT&T’s fastest wireless network wins are based on consumer-led nationwide test results that come from millions of real people that take tests daily on the Ookla Speedtest application.

OUR DEDICATION TO PROVIDING A GREAT WIRELESS EXPERIENCE

Over the past 5 years (2015-2019), AT&T invested more than $125 billion in our U.S. wireless and wireline networks, including capital investments and acquisitions of wireless spectrum and operations. Over this same period, we invested more in the United States than any other public company. And we’re not stopping – we continue to dedicate our time and resources to enhance our network for customers and communities across the country.

In addition, we continue to enhance our wireless solutions for our customers. With the recent launch of Unlimited Your WaySM, our customers can save more by picking the best unlimited wireless plan for each family member on their account, without everyone having to be on the same plan.4
How AT&T 5G WORKS
5G is the next generation of wireless technology expected to deliver latency and capacity enhancements that will help enable revolutionary new capabilities for consumers and businesses.

Two flavors of next
generation 5G technology

We are building our more widely available 5G network on the Nation’s Best Wireless Network using low-band spectrum. This service is nationwide. This service covers broader distances and is ideal for mobile customers who need performance while on the go.

We offer an enhanced wireless experience on 5G+ with our millimeter wave service though with more limited coverage. Results continue to be impressive – with peak download speeds up to 1 Gbps. Customers at select businesses, universities, hospitals and sports venues are beginning to see the early benefits.

Dynamic spectrum sharing live in portions of our network today

AT&T was among the first to present and champion this technology, eventually driving it into 5G standards. DSS will now play an important role in widespread 5G adoption. Simply put, DSS allows carriers to share the same channel between both 4G and 5G users simultaneously. It turns up 5G without turning off LTE – creating a seamless experience for users, and a graceful spectrum transition for carriers. The term “dynamic” in DSS refers to the ability to allocate resources to each technology based on demand.

Dynamic Spectrum Sharing: From Labs to Live

A few short years ago, an idea was shaped in AT&T Labs: the concept now known as Dynamic Spectrum Sharing (DSS). And today, it is live in portions of our network with 5G devices already upgraded in the field. AT&T was among the first to present and champion this technology, eventually driving it into 5G standards. DSS will now play an essential role in widespread 5G adoption.

Simply put, DSS allows carriers to share the same channel between both 4G and 5G users simultaneously. It turns up 5G without turning off LTE – creating a seamless experience for users, and a graceful spectrum transition for carriers.

The term “dynamic” in DSS refers to the ability to allocate resources to each technology based on demand.  This requires that DSS is traffic-aware, and able to respond to changes. The performance of DSS will depend in large part on how frequently traffic demand changes and the granularity of the resource allocations.

DSS is an important steppingstone on our path to nationwide 5G. The software-based technology allows us to bypass the process of re-farming spectrum in the near term, which ultimately means a smoother transition and expedited 5G adoption.

Since its inception in our labs, DSS has graduated to become an integral part of our intelligent network and we’re encouraged by the progress. We will continue expanding our 5G coverage throughout the year, bringing the power of 5G to more customers from coast to coast.
New and Existing Customers Can Get an Awesome Discount of Up to $700 Off the LG WING 5G with Trade-In

AT&T* is bringing our customers the LG WING 5G, the world’s first 5G swivel smartphone that can tap into the power of AT&T 5G.  The smartphone breaks the mold of a traditional dual-screen form factor with a versatile, future forward swivel design that allows you to multi-task and stay entertained on rotating screens. AT&T customers can get the device in-store and online at att.com/wing5g on November 6.

EVERYONE CAN GET A GREAT DEAL ON THE LG WING 5G

AT&T is bringing  great discounts on the LG WING 5G to both new and existing customers. They can get it for $11.67/Mo. (that’s $700 off) when they trade-in an eligible smartphone, purchase the device on a qualifying installment plan and be on or change to an eligible unlimited wireless plan.1

It’s a great price on a ground-breaking smartphone that taps into the latest in AT&T technology because it can access the nationwide AT&T 5G network, and it can also tap into our 5G+ network, capable of ultra-fast speeds and available in parts of 36 cities across the U.S.2

While the LG WING 5G is transformative in its design and technology, it also offers the following next level features that will upgrade your mobile experience:

To a “T”: In basic mode, the LG WING 5G looks like a traditional smartphone, with a slim and sleek design that can easily fit in your pocket. Then, you can simply rotate the entire front screen clockwise 90 degrees revealing a second screen for use.
Transformative Display: If you need more space to get tasks done, a single application can be expanded to both screens. Or, if you’re looking to multitask, you can display two apps simultaneously. Use it to watch AT&T TV3 on the cinematic 6.8-inch edge-to-edge main display while chatting or surfing on the 3.9-inch secondary screen.4
Film and Capture Like a Pro: The LG WING 5G is the first smartphone of its kind to incorporate a Gimbal camera feature. The second screen transforms into a convenient grip, providing the stability you need to capture smooth video footage with one hand. It even comes with functions like joystick angle control, shake reduction and follow mode to track every movement.
It will also be arriving at AT&T in Aurora Gray.

SAVE MORE ON YOUR WIRELESS PLANS WITH UNLIMITED YOUR WAY

With Unlimited Your Way, our customers have more flexibility and ability to save on wireless plans for the whole family. Now, every person on your account can pick the best unlimited wireless plan for their needs, without everyone having to be on the same wireless plan. And, nationwide 5G access is included in all our Unlimited plans – at no additional cost. Plans start at just $35/mo per line for 4 lines.5

SAFELY SHOP FOR THE NEW LG WING 5G THE WAY YOU WANT

We provide customers choice on the shopping method that works best for them. Where available, AT&T Right To You, our exclusive white glove service, allows customers to choose when and where they want to receive their device – whether it’s in the comfort of their home, business or somewhere in between. You can also safely pick-up your device curbside at your local AT&T store or shop online, with free express shipping and returns.

The LG WING 5G is also FirstNet Ready™, which means first responders can use it to tap into the power of FirstNet® - America’s public safety communications network. It is approved to operate with services using the dedicated FirstNet LTE network core.6

For more information on our AT&T 5G technology and where it’s available, visit att.com/5G/consumer/. To see how we’re using 5G to make a difference, check out att.com/5GNews.
AT&T Is Bringing 5G+ to U.S. Airports

Travelers at Tampa International Airport will be the First to Experience AT&T’s Super-Fast Service

The effects of COVID-19 left a huge impact on the travel industry with a heavy decline in national and international travel among Americans. Although things have slowed down, AT&T is working behind the scenes to enhance customer travel experiences with the widespread deployment of 5G+ in airports across the country.

The multi-year effort will cover major gate and concession spaces at select U.S. airports, where travelers and airport employees have the greatest need when accessing mobile applications and entertainment with a 5G+ capable device.

AT&T 5G+ Lands at Tampa International Airport.

Last month, AT&T launched 5G+ at TPA, providing coverage from the moment passengers with a current unlimited plan turn on their capable phones at the airplane boarding gates, to the moment they leave the airport.

“This is a tremendous enhancement for our passengers and guests and we’re thrilled to be able to roll this out just in time for Super Bowl LV,” said Marcus Session, TPA’s VP of Information Technology Services. “With the future increase of airport traffic, it is important that our wireless networks are enhanced to support the connected traveler. Having this kind of connectivity will help improve the passenger experience and create a positive impression for everyone who uses it.”

How Can Travelers Benefit from 5G+ in Airports

A stronger network means no more worrying about hit-or-miss Wi-Fi connections in airports. Travelers can stay connected to the people they love, be more productive working or stay entertained watching their favorite movies or shows. Customers with a capable device and qualifying plan will be able to download an entire season of Friends or Sesame Street on HBO Max before a flight to stay entertained throughout their journey.

Our investment has enabled AT&T to have the Fastest Nationwide 5G Network1 and with 5G+ coverage coming to participating U.S airports, AT&T will deliver greater connectivity for travelers in the U.S. and help provide a more enjoyable, seamless travel experience. In addition, fast and reliable connectivity in airports can also help improve operational efficiency for airlines, other tenants and airport operations.

“We strive to exceed our customers’ expectations with technology that will enhance their day-to-day lives,” said Jay Cary, VP - 5G Product & Innovation Postpaid Wireless Products. “As Americans gain confidence traveling again, we’re proud to bring AT&T 5G+ to its first airport, with more to come nationwide. Providing our 5G+ network in airports across the country will help enhance experiences of streaming and downloading movies and games, securely access demanding business applications, and help with logistics such as in-airport navigation, checking flight updates and more.”

AT&T 5G+ – It’s Not Complicated

Access to our 5G+ network is now easier than ever because it comes included in our postpaid unlimited plans at no extra cost to you. And those customers with AT&T Unlimited Elite get the added benefit of HBO Max included on us. 5G+ is included in our postpaid business unlimited plans too.2

AT&T’s 5G+ airport investment is another example of our commitment to dedicate time and resources to improve our network for customers and communities across the country. To learn more about our 5G+ network, visit att.com/5Gforyou.
AT&T just launched its 5G+ service in parts of Downtown Tampa, starting with the Channel District with more areas to come. 5G+ is AT&T’s name for 5G service delivered using millimeter wave spectrum, which can deliver unprecedented performance, with download speeds of up to 1 Gbps., in high-traffic areas.

Those who live, work and play in the Channel District now have access to both flavors of AT&T 5G. Our 5G service, using low-band spectrum, offers the Fastest Nationwide 5G Network1 to customers on-the-go or at home, and 5G+ delivers even faster speeds in high-traffic areas.

Stay tuned as we bring 5G+ to new parts of Downtown Tampa over the next few weeks and to parts of more cities across the country in 2021!
AT&T and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Will Test 5G-Powered Healthcare Innovations

AT&T AND U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS WILL PILOT HEALTHCARE INNOVATIONS WITH AT&T 5G AND MULTI-ACCESS EDGE COMPUTING
What’s the news? AT&T* has delivered AT&T 5G capabilities across the entirety of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Puget Sound Health Care System in Seattle in a public-private partnership with the VA. VA expects to pilot a variety of healthcare use cases with our 5G and multi-access edge computing (MEC ) technologies to explore how they can improve healthcare delivery to the approximately 9 million Veterans who use VA healthcare services each year.

Why is this important? This is an industry-first deployment of 5G and MEC capabilities across the entirety of a VA health care and training facility. Multi-access edge computing is essentially a computer and cellular network architecture that brings real-time, high-bandwidth, low-latency access to latency dependent mobile applications. 5G and MEC “holds the potential to be transformational by enabling new healthcare delivery and business models” according to Gartner1. Among the healthcare-focused use cases that could be piloted are:

Mobile-to-mobile connectivity across/between medical devices, allowing the tracking of people and assets within the facility.
Improved medical procedures and training through the use of emerging technologies such as augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR).
Remote and virtual pain management using AR and VR.
Remote and/or near real-time surgical assistance via the ability to layer multiple surgical techniques using AR.
What is the status of the technology implementation?

We have completed installation of a 5G Distributed Antenna System (DAS) for use with Sub6 GHz spectrum and  other components needed to enable 5G. This 5G coverage extends to the recently opened Mental Health & Research building. We expect to deploy MEC and 5G millimeter wave spectrum and technologies in 2021, which will significantly boost speeds while improving latency.

Daniel Mesimer, Director, WAN/LAN Infrastructure Engineering & Provisioning

Solution Delivery, Office of Information and Technology, IT Operations and Services, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

“AT&T has installed a full 5G Distributed Antenna System (DAS) encompassing the entire Seattle VA Medical Center. This is the first campus-wide indoor 5G system to be used by both VA staff and veterans on the AT&T Mobility Network. This 5G system allows for increased carrier speeds and provides the next generation of cellular and mobility technology for both veterans and staff. It sets the groundwork for future capabilities of mobility networks for VA users and applications.”

Chris Smith, Vice President – Civilian and Shared Services, AT&T Public Sector and FirstNet

“This public-private partnership to test our 5G and MEC capabilities is distinguished by the scope of implementation and innovation it allows, going well beyond a single-room care environment to encompass an entire medical care and training campus. It’s an honor to work with the VA to explore the future of 5G and MEC-powered healthcare innovations.”
AT&T 5G. Today Nationwide.
AT&T’s 5G Network is Fast, Reliable, Secure – and Today it’s Nationwide

All Current AT&T Consumer Unlimited Wireless Plans Will Come with AT&T 5G at No Additional Cost Starting Aug. 7

AT&T’s* 5G network is live for consumers and businesses across the country as of today, built on the nation’s best and also fastest wireless network.1

“Just as our lives have shifted in the past few months, so has our expectation of wireless technology,” said Jeff McElfresh, CEO of AT&T Communications. “With AT&T 5G reaching nationwide, our network is beginning the journey to transform connectivity as we know it by setting a new bar of breathtaking experiences and improved efficiency. Businesses, developers and consumers are already tapping into 5G’s potential and we’re thrilled for customers across the U.S. to experience it for themselves. It’s an exciting time in technology.”

07222020_5GHowToAccess_Normal_IN_STORY_768x475.jpg
We’ve built AT&T 5G with our customers in mind, because they are more connected today than ever before. 5G will make the things we do today better and ultimately improve those experiences overall. And now that our 5G signal reaches customers nationwide, there are immediate benefits they can enjoy right away, including:
AT&T 5G offers nationwide connectivity, so whether you’re at home or on-the-go, you’ll enjoy 5G coverage in more places. 2 And 5G’s speed means fast downloads and very little lag time for all your on-demand entertainment and favorite mobile games. Increased capacity capabilities of 5G will ultimately bring more bandwidth to handle all your devices at once – from your smartphone, to your smart watch, to your connected car and beyond!
Starting Aug. 7, we are adding 5G access to our AT&T Unlimited Starter wireless plan for consumers starting at $35/mo for 4 lines. This means access to the AT&T 5G network will come at no additional cost for customers on any of our AT&T Unlimited Starter, Extra and Elite plans.3
Also starting Aug. 7, we are adding 5G access to our AT&T Business Unlimited Web-Only and Starter plans. This means business customers with any of our AT&T Business Unlimited Web-Only, Starter, Performance and Elite plans will have 5G access at no additional cost. 4
Many cool devices, including the Samsung Galaxy Note10+ 5G, Samsung Galaxy S20 family, Samsung Galaxy A71 5G, the LG V60 ThinQ 5G, and the LG VELVET 5G (and look for more coming soon).
And our prepaid consumers looking for 5G service with no annual contract and no credit check have two options:
AT&T PREPAID customers can now purchase a 5G-enabled device at an AT&T store or activate an eligible 5G-enabled device on the Unlimited Plus plan.
On Aug. 21, Cricket Wireless customers will be able to activate 5G service on the Samsung Galaxy S20+ 5G. More details soon!

AT&T 5G promises businesses and consumers a whole new kind of network.

5G has already having a significant impact on how businesses operate (https://www.business.att.com/learn/5G/). Now with nationwide 5G, we can build even more custom experiences for businesses to engage with their customers in new and exciting ways -- whether they’re a small business or a large enterprise.
We’re already seeing 5G’s impact on the entertainment we consume today to things around the house, but as it progresses, it can power more immersive, multisensory, digital content like AR/VR that gives consumers an unrivaled interactive experience, live gaming and new experiences with connected devices such as your home appliances, security system or even your toothbrush.
And as America looks ahead, technologies like 5G are going to play a huge role in building the future of all industries – with a big emphasis on healthcare, manufacturing, retail and live entertainment. Thanks to AT&T’s mmWave 5G technology (now available in parts of 35 cities across the country), we can enable those super-fast speeds and responsive connections.
“Our strategy of deploying 5G in both sub-6  (5G) and mmWave (5G+) spectrum bands will provide the best mix of speeds, latency and coverage that are needed to enable revolutionary new capabilities to fuel 5G experiences for consumers and businesses,” said Chris Sambar, EVP of Technology Operations. “Our competitors are still working to provide that same mix, which for them could take months or even years. What we offer is available to consumers and businesses today, and we’re not slowing down. As we have throughout our 144-year history, we’ll continue to innovate and invest in our network to expand our 5G coverage to more consumers and businesses across the country.”
SoftBank and Huawei Demonstrate 5G Use Cases

SoftBank Corp. (“SoftBank”) and Huawei Technologies Japan K.K. (“Huawei”) jointly demonstrated various potential use cases for a 5G network, which provides ultra-high throughput, ultra-low latency transmission, and edge computing, to SoftBank's business partners.

The demonstration included real-time UHD video transmission using ultra-high throughput, remote control of a robotic arm using ultra-low latency transmission and remote rendering via a GPU server using edge computing. The real-time UHD video transmission demonstrated throughput of over 800 Mbps. Also, the remote control of the robotic arm demonstrated an ultra-low latency one-way transmission of less than 2ms.

SoftBank is planning various experiments to study 5G technologies and is endeavoring to launch 5G commercial services around 2020.

[Note]
* In edge computing, servers are located near by base stations, i.e. at the edge of an mobile network, with a distributed way. This architecture allows us to realize ultra low latency transmission between the servers and mobile terminals. Also, it is possible to process a huge amount of data gathered by IoT devices to decrease the load of the mobile network.
Demonstration details
1. Real-time UHD video transmission
A UHD camera was installed inside the demonstration room to capture outdoor scenery. The data from this camera was then compressed in real-time using an encoder and transmitted through the ultra-high throughput 5G network to a UHD monitor via a decoder, where the original data was recovered. In this demonstration, the scenery of the Odaiba Tokyo Bay area was successfully displayed on the UHD monitor using the ultra-high throughput provided by the 5G network. This technology can be applied to various industries, including tele-health or tele-education.

Real-time UHD video transmission

2. Immersive video
Scenery was captured by a 180-degree camera equipped with four lenses pointing four different directions installed in the demonstration room, and captured scenery was distributed to smartphones and tablets over the 5G network. Four separate cameras were set up to capture the scenery in different directions, and the video images captured by these cameras were stitched together to generate a 180-degree panoramic video image that enabled multiple simultaneous camera views. Then the video image was compressed and distributed to smartphones or tablets in real-time over the 5G network, which gives users a truly realistic user experience. Coupled with a 5G network, this technology can be applied to virtual reality (VR) or augmented reality (AR).

Immersive video

3. Remote control of robotic arm with ultra-low latency
A robotic arm played an air hockey game against a human in this demonstration. A camera installed on top of the air hockey table detected the puck's position to calculate its trajectory. The calculated result was then forwarded to the robotic arm control server to control the robotic arm. In this demonstration, the robotic arm was able to strike back the puck shot by the human player on various trajectories. This technology can be applied to factory automation, for example.

Remote control of robotic arm with ultra-low latency

4. Remote rendering by GPU server
Rendering is a technology used to generate videos or images using computers with GPUs (Graphic Processor Unit). This technology is used for generating HD videos in computer games or for CAD (Computer Aided Design). The rendering consumes a large amount of computing resources. Therefore, HD computer games or HD CADs were not executable on tablets or smartphones on their own. However, edge computing technology provided by the 5G network allows us to enjoy HD computer games or HD CADs on tablets or smartphones. A GPU server located near a 5G base station performed rendering and the image generated by the GPU server was sent to the tablet over the ultra-high throughput and ultra-low latency 5G network. This technology can be applied to check the CAD data at a construction site with a tablet or to enjoy a HD game application on a smartphone.

Remote rendering by GPU server

[Notes]
* “Immersive video” and “remote control of a robotic arm with ultra-low latency” were jointly integrated and configured for demonstration by SoftBank and Huawei. “UHD real-time video transmission” and “Remote rendering with GPU servers” were integrated and configured for demonstration by SoftBank.
SoftBank, its name and logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of the companies in the SoftBank Group in Japan or other countries.
All other company and product or services names in this press release may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.
The information is true and accurate at the time of publication.
Price, specification, contact and other information of products and service may be subjected to change. The information contains certain forward-looking statements that are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such statements.
SoftBank and Honda to Begin Joint Research
on Connected Car Technologies that Utilize
5th Generation Mobile Communication System (5G)


TOKYO, Japan, November 16, 2017 — SoftBank Corp. (“SoftBank”) a subsidiary of SoftBank Group Corp., and Honda Motor Co., Ltd. (“Honda”), today announced that SoftBank and Honda R&D Co., Ltd. (“Honda R&D”), a wholly owned R&D subsidiary of Honda, have begun discussions toward a joint research project to strengthen connected car technologies* which will offer new experiences and value by connecting mobility products, primarily cars, and various other things. The two companies will pursue this joint research with a view to the future adoption of 5th generation mobile communication system (“5G”) standards.

In the fiscal year beginning April 1, 2018, SoftBank will install experiential 5G base stations at Honda R&D's Takasu Proving Ground (in Takasu-cho, Kamikawa-gun, Hokkaido, Japan), and the two companies will start full-fledged joint research under the 5G environment.

[Note]
* Internet-connectivity and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication technologies
Outline of the joint research
The two companies will create a 5G environment by utilizing Honda's closed test course (Takasu Proving Ground) and work to develop the following technologies;

High-speed handover technology
The development of technologies and on-board antennas which will enable a stable handover of base stations for communication by a vehicle moving at high-speed.
Recovery technologies for areas with weak/out-of-range signals
The development of technologies that can secure data sending/receiving performance in areas with a weak signal as well as data processing technologies.
Technological development for various other usages
SUBARU Corporation and SoftBank Corp.
Start Joint Research on Use Cases Related to
Driving Assist and Automated Driving Control
Using 5G and Cellular V2X
- Companies plan to prepare a communications environment and conduct proving tests
with automated driving vehicles on SUBARU's proving ground in Bifuka, Hokkaido -

SUBARU Corporation (headquartered in Shibuya Ward, Tokyo; Tomomi Nakamura, Representative Director, President and CEO) and SoftBank Corp. (headquartered in Minato Ward, Tokyo; Ken Miyauchi, President & CEO) have started joint research on use cases that apply fifth-generation (5G) mobile communication systems and cellular V2X*1 (C-V2X) communication systems to help realize an automated driving society.

Aiming to eliminate traffic accident deaths*2 by 2030, SUBARU is conducting a program of research and development on connected car technologies under its original philosophy of “overall safety.” The purpose of this program is to further Subaru's advanced safety technology developed with its EyeSight driver assist system.

SoftBank Corp. is pursuing the research and development of service solutions to deliver new experiences and value. As a part of this undertaking, it is examining Mobility as a Service (MaaS) and conducting proving tests for connected cars that utilize 5G systems and other leading-edge communication technologies.

In their joint research, the two companies plan to install SoftBank Corp.'s “ODEKAKE 5G” (transportable equipment enabling local provision of high-quality 5G radio waves) at the SUBARU Test & Development Center Bifuka Proving Ground (located in Bifuka-cho, Hokkaido) beginning this winter. This will be accompanied by the preparation of an environment for 5G networking with specifications meeting the non-stand-alone standard*3 and for C-V2X communications, which will be followed by proving tests. The proving test plans envision communications both between stations and vehicles and between vehicles, and the verification of technology related to driving assist and automated driving control, in various prospective use cases
SoftBank Acquires Experimental License for 5G on
28GHz Band and Begins Trials


SoftBank Corp. (“SoftBank”), a subsidiary of SoftBank Group Corp. (TOKYO: 9984), today announced that on March 15, 2017 it was granted an experimental license to conduct tests on the 28GHz frequency band, a candidate for 5G mobile communications (“5G”) in Japan. Starting today, SoftBank will commence indoor and outdoor trials in Tokyo Waterfront City (Daiba District) using the 28GHz band with a view to future commercial deployment.

SoftBank has already acquired experimental licenses to test on both the 4GHz and 4.5GHz bands, which are also frequency band candidates for 5G, and it began conducting 5G field trials in August 2016. By proceeding with trials on these candidate bands and on the newly added 28GHz candidate band, and through the accumulation of know-how to implement 5G, SoftBank aims to launch 5G commercial services around 2020.

In anticipation of future 5G deployment, SoftBank kicked off its 5G Project in September 2016 to be the first to bring the latest technologies to its customers, starting with the world's first commercial service using Massive MIMO technology, a key element for 5G. By utilizing insights gained from commercial services and conducting 5G trials, SoftBank aims to realize stable services in real commercial environments in time for its 5G commercial rollout planned for around 2020.

The trials will evaluate the characteristics of radio wave propagation on the 4GHz, 4.5GHz and 28GHz bands respectively. They will be conducted in indoor and outdoor environments using trial equipment mounted with 5G technology elements to verify Massive MIMO, new air interfaces and other aspects, with a view to testing for 5G specification targets: ultra-speed broadband communications exceeding 10Gbps, ultra-low latency communications under 1ms, among others.
SoftBank Corp. and KDDI Corporation to Cooperate on
Rapid Build-out of 5G Networks in Japan's Rural Areas
through Mutual Use of Base Station Assets
Both companies aim to raise Japan's international competitiveness
by contributing to its industrial development, regional revitalization and national resilience


SoftBank Corp. (“SoftBank”) and KDDI Corporation (“KDDI”) today announced they have reached an agreement on the mutual use of their base station assets to jointly promote the rapid build-out of 5G networks in Japan's rural areas.

Many issues lie ahead for Japanese society, including an aging population, a shrinking workforce, depopulation in rural areas, deteriorating infrastructure and natural disasters of increased intensity. To address these issues, the Japanese government is advocating Society 5.0 and promoting initiatives to achieve it. With the spread of a super-smart society under Society 5.0, large volumes of data will need to be shared to utilize IoT, big data and AI, and a rapid build-out of 5G networks is expected to help facilitate this. In particular, 5G networks are expected to help resolve Japan's regional issues by enabling remote monitoring and operation through the transmission of high-definition images. Furthermore, 5G networks can help increase productivity by facilitating data gathering and analysis, which could contribute to the revitalization of regional industries, including local companies and startups.

Since 5G networks use the 28GHz and 3.7GHz high-frequency bands, many base stations need to be installed nationwide, and this requires long-term construction and large investment commitments. Accordingly, to quickly provide services that meet Japan's regional revitalization needs, more than ever before, carriers need to promote mutual infrastructure sharing to efficiently construct a network of 5G base stations. To accelerate the build-out of 5G networks in rural areas, SoftBank and KDDI will explore options with a view to establishing a joint construction management company that would facilitate construction designs and manage construction work to efficiently utilize the base station assets of both companies.

As a first step, both companies will establish a preparatory office, and starting this fall, conduct joint trials in Asahikawa City in Hokkaido, Narita City in Chiba Prefecture and Fukuyama City in Hiroshima Prefecture. In addition to streamlining processes from design to construction management stages, the trials will be used to verify the effects of 5G network quality improvements and shortened construction periods in rural areas.

SoftBank, under its Corporate Philosophy “Information Revolution — Happiness for everyone,” and KDDI, guided by its Group Mission to “deliver a thrilling customer experience by always going further than expected with the ultimate goal of achieving a truly connected society,” will rapidly construct 5G networks that serve all industries. Both companies will do this with the aim of raising Japan's international competitiveness by contributing to its industrial development, regional revitalization and national resilience.
Vodafone partners with Dresden University of Technology to expand global research programme

Vodafone today announced a partnership with Dresden University of Technology to research and develop 5G technology.  Vodafone will work with the university to bring together academics, developers and technology companies to explore the capabilities of 5G and establish technical guidelines for its development.

The partnership with Dresden University of Technology is part of Vodafone’s global programme to research the next generation of wireless technologies with universities, technology companies and industry groups around the world*.

While 5G technology is still in the early stages of development, researchers predict that it will radically enhance the speed, resilience and intelligence of mobile networks and has the potential to:

significantly reduce latency, enabling a new generation of sophisticated M2M applications;

substantially increase the number of devices that can simultaneously connect to a network;

allow greater spectral efficiency; and

expand the reach of ultra-fast mobile networks.

To support research activities, Dresden University of Technology has opened its first 5G lab which offers specific facilities where researchers can test and evaluate a wide range of 5G technologies, including:

network hardware and software;

computer chips;

spectrum; and

cloud computing.

Professor Gerhard Fettweis, the Vodafone Chair of Mobile Communications Systems, Dresden University of Technology, said: “Today, mobile communications is all about moving content from one place to another. Tomorrow it will be about being able to control a vast array of objects in real-time with little human intervention. To get there we need to rethink wireless communications, particularly with regard to data rates, latency and IP services. With our new 5G lab, and the support of our partners like Vodafone, Dresden is well positioned to lead a cross-industry effort to find answers to some of these challenging questions.”

Luke Ibbetson, Vodafone’s head of research and development, said: “Vodafone is proud to be taking a leadership role in the development of the next generation of wireless communications. While 5G is in very early stages of development it’s important that we invest the time and effort to really understand the technology. There are several years of research ahead of us and Vodafone looks forward to working closely with Dresden and its other partners around the world to build a technical foundation for the next generation of mobile communications.”
Vodafone and AST SpaceMobile unveil launch plans for space-based mobile network initially reaching 1.6 billion people

  • AST & Science LLC (“AST SpaceMobile”) secures necessary funding for first phase commercial launch of space-based mobile network. 
  • Project aims to transform mobile network coverage for the 49 largest countries in the equatorial regions – including Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana, Mozambique, Kenya, and Tanzania – from 2023. 
  • SpaceMobile will be the first space-based mobile network to connect directly to 4G and 5G smartphones without any need for specialised hardware. 
TEXAS, LONDON, JOHANNESBURG – December 16, 2020 – AST SpaceMobile, in partnership with Vodafone Group, today unveiled plans to launch the first phase of its space-based commercial mobile communications service in 2023. The company has secured the necessary funding to take the venture to this next stage, which will cover the 49 largest countries in the equatorial regions.
Vodafone wants to ensure that our customers are always connected and everyone benefits from a digital society. This is why we are a lead, strategic partner of AST SpaceMobile, which is uniquely positioned to provide universal mobile coverage to rural areas in Africa, and in the future, Europe, further extending our leading network. The space-based mobile network will also enable us to provide instant communications in the event of a natural or humanitarian disaster. 
AST SpaceMobile will be the first service of its kind to connect standard mobile phones at 4G and 5G speeds using AST SpaceMobile’s patented space-based network. Today, more than five billion mobile subscribers constantly move in and out of wireless coverage, and AST SpaceMobile’s solution will fill these coverage gaps to enable people to stay connected whilst on the move. This is a significant breakthrough in helping to bring affordable mobile connectivity to more than half of the world’s population that do not have internet on their phone. Traditional satellite systems require expensive specialised satellite phones or ground antenna systems, which is different to AST SpaceMobile’s patented technology, where all that is needed is the phone in your pocket.
The first tranche of AST SpaceMobile’s launch plans will involve the use of 20 satellites to offer seamless, low-latency mobile connectivity that can be accessed by approximately 1.6 billion people across a vast geographical region. The initial service will target an area North and South of the equator, including rural and remote areas of a number of markets where Vodafone will integrate the technology into the services provided by its Vodacom, Safaricom and Vodafone brands. Subject to regulatory approval in each market, these will include DRC; Ghana; Mozambique; Kenya; and Tanzania. AST SpaceMobile will also apply for regulatory approval to launch the service in India.
Shameel Joosub, the CEO of Vodacom Group, said: “Providing affordable mobile coverage for everyone requires a blend of technologies and infrastructure, from traditional masts to small cells, balloons and satellites at the edge of space. While we have been adding deep rural network sites to connect remote communities without any coverage, the lack of power in some areas creates insurmountable obstacles. AST SpaceMobile will ensure that remote communities in many sub-Saharan African countries can have access to the latest digital services.”
“We are thrilled to move forward in executing on phase one of our commercial launch in conjunction with Vodafone,” said Abel Avellan, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of AST SpaceMobile.  “Our high-speed, low latency platform represents the world’s first venture aimed at massively closing the digital divide by bringing affordable and accessible connectivity to the regions that need it most. We believe our game-changing solution will serve to drive universal and global connectivity, allowing societies to utilise digital technology to gain greater access to knowledge and information.”
In order to support the phase one commercial launch of its network, AST SpaceMobile has secured up to US$462 million in gross proceeds in additional financing. This will come from existing investors in the company including Vodafone, Rakuten and American Tower as well as new financial investors including UBS O’Connor and a broad base of financial institutions. 
AST SpaceMobile today also announced that it entered into a business combination agreement with New Providence Acquisition Corp. (NASDAQ: NPA, NPAUU and NPAWW), a publicly traded special purpose acquisition company, assuming no redemptions of New Providence’s existing public stockholders, including the private placement backed by strategic partners, existing investors and a broad base of financial institutions. Upon closing of the transaction, AST SpaceMobile will become a publicly traded company, and it is expected that its common stock will be listed on the NASDAQ exchange under the symbol “ASTS”. All AST SpaceMobile shareholders are retaining 100% of their equity in the combined company. The cash proceeds are expected to be used to fund phase one of the commercial launch of AST SpaceMobile’s space assets.
Backed by an extensive IP and patent portfolio, AST SpaceMobile will enable global seamless roaming to and from terrestrial cellular networks, filling mobile coverage gaps around the world. With initial access to 1.3 billion subscribers from a group of the world’s largest wireless communications companies, AST SpaceMobile’s services will ultimately aim to meet the needs of the five billion mobile subscribers who face broadband connectivity issues when moving in and out of terrestrial cellular range and enable mobility access to more than


OPPO and Vodafone announce partnership agreement to bring a broad range of OPPO products to Vodafone’s European markets
OPPO will first enter Vodafone's European markets, including Germany, United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, Romania, Turkey and the Netherlands, progressively rolling out across Vodafone channels
Vodafone customers will benefit from a broad range of OPPO’s products from entry-level to state-of-the-art flagship products, including both 4G and 5G smartphones
Partnership agreement will enable OPPO and Vodafone to accelerate 5G adoption and expand availability of OPPO products to more Vodafone markets and customers.
May 18, 2020, SHENZHEN, CHINA / LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM — OPPO and Vodafone today announced a comprehensive partnership agreement that will bring a broad range of OPPO’s smartphones to Vodafone’s European markets starting from May 2020.
As a leading smartphone brand with an innovative product portfolio, advanced 5G technology know-how, and annual handset shipments of more than 100 million, OPPO is a natural partner for Vodafone’s leading gigabit network. The collaboration between the two companies will give consumers more choice and accelerate 5G adoption across Vodafone’s international markets.
OPPO’s broad range of products will be made available across Vodafone’s retail and online channels, spanning value-for-money handsets to industry-leading 5G flagship smartphones including the OPPO A series, Reno series and Find X series.
In the first phase of cooperation, Vodafone will introduce OPPO products across retail channels in Germany, United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, Romania, Turkey and the Netherlands. The two companies will jointly develop their global partnership, working together to expand the future availability of the OPPO range across Vodafone's market
Alen Wu, Vice President and President of Global Sales, OPPO said: "OPPO is confident that our industry-leading products and technologies will enable Vodafone to win new opportunities in the 5G era. Vodafone's vision that ‘we connect for a better future’ aligns with OPPO's value of ‘Benfen’ – to do the right thing and provide real value to customers. OPPO looks forward to solidifying a long-term win-win relationship with Vodafone to create a better future for our customers in the 5G era.”
Ahmed Essam, Vodafone Group Chief Commercial Operations and Strategy Officer, said: “The combination of OPPO’s state-of-the-art devices and Vodafone’s leading network will give our customers greater choice with the full potential of 5G. Vodafone’s partnership with OPPO brings together their attractive product portfolio with our growing strength in 5G to our markets across Europe and beyond.”
OPPO predominantly manufactures its products in-house and most of its manufacturing facilities have resumed normal operation, ensuring that even during the Coronavirus outbreak period, OPPO can continue to provide products to Vodafone and ensure business continuity. While physical retail is currently constrained, both companies will develop online sales channels and ensure continued support for customers. OPPO will also closely work with Vodafone to ensure the continued safety of employees and customers as restrictions at retail are lifted.
OPPO’s series of products will be rolled out from May through Vodafone in Germany, the United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, Romania, Turkey and the Netherlands. Further announcements will be made by OPPO and Vodafone about product availability in other countries.
5G Future Forum releases first technical specifications to accelerate global adoption of 5G Multi-access Edge Computing

The 5G Future Forum, a group of global 5G leaders accelerating the delivery of Multi-access Edge Computing-enabled solutions around the world, will release its first technical specifications to its members in the third quarter of 2020 – a major step forward in enabling global interoperability for 5G and Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) deployment to deliver efficient and innovative services to end customers.  There are two major sets of technical specifications:
  • The “MEC Experience Management” technical specification defines a set of intent-based APIs for functional exposure of edge and workload discovery with potential expansion to include future MEC functions and capabilities which are driven by network intelligence 
  • The “MEC Deployment” technical specification defines the set of specifications to enable hyperscalers and service providers to deploy and integrate global MEC physical frameworks, including facilities (e.g. power and cooling), monitoring, operational considerations, and security. 
The 5G Future Forum was established in January 2020 by América Móvil, KT Corp., Rogers, Telstra, Verizon, and Vodafone to develop 5G interoperability specifications to accelerate the delivery of 5G and MEC solutions around the world. Over the past six months, the Forum’s founding members have been working to create the governance structure for the 5GFF, as well as develop both technical and commercial workstreams.
The technical specifications are the first outputs from the technical workstream, which brings together technologists from all member telecommunications service providers. They are designed for 5G telecommunication service providers, cloud service providers (‘hyperscalers’), OEMs, developers, and enterprises.
The specifications will be released in August 2020. Following release of the specifications, the Forum anticipates expanding its membership to qualified new entrants. Other topics are being planned among the existing members with publication timeframes to be communicated shortly. 
“The 5G Future Forum was set up to unlock the full potential of 5G and MEC applications and solutions around the globe,” said Rima Qureshi, chief strategy officer, Verizon. “5G is a key enabler of the next industrial revolution, where technology should transform how we live and work through applications including machine learning, autonomous industrial equipment, smart cars and cities, Internet of Things (IoT) and augmented and virtual reality. The release of these first specifications marks a major step forward in helping companies around the world create a seamless global experience for their customers.”
“We are in the right direction to bring more innovation to our customers and start delivering new 5G services, which should increase the quality and enhance the user experience through the adoption of MEC”, said Daniel Hajj, América Móvil CEO, “We are pleased with this first achievement from the 5GFF Members to build the future for the 5G deployment.”
“The release of the first specification and whitepaper of 5G Future Forum ushers in a practical approach to put MEC solutions into the market. With this groundwork firmly in place,the 5GFF partnership should continue to further motivate rich 5G innovations in the MEC space where state-of-the-art technologies like AI and AR/VR are to be seamlessly integrated for more competitive services,” said Dr. Hongbeom Jeon, chief DX officer, KT Corp.
"The capabilities and potential benefits that 5G should bring to consumers and businesses around the globe are seemingly limitless, and the 5G Future Forum will help accelerate the delivery of this technology at a global scale,” said Jorge Fernandes, Chief Technology and Information Officer, Rogers Communications. “At Rogers, we are focused on building a strong ecosystem of partners and fostering commercial 5G development to fuel businesses, industries and drive Canada’s economy forward. The 5G Future Forum’s upcoming specifications are an important step in evolving the capabilities of 5G and mobile edge computing to help us deliver innovative technology solutions that will bring Canadian and global businesses the very best of 5G.”
Telstra’s Group Executive for Networks and IT, Nikos Katinakis, said this specification and whitepaper is an important step towards unleashing greater 5G capabilities for enterprise and consumers alike. “5G and edge compute have the potential to truly revolutionise how organisations operate and be a game changer for a range of applications. Telstra is proud to stand alongside these global 5G leaders in the 5G Future Forum and to be developing initiatives that bring mobile edge computing to life.”  
Johan Wibergh, Vodafone Group Chief Technology Officer, said: “The speed and capacity of 5G, with the immediacy of MEC, can give economies the productivity boost needed to help them recover from the coronavirus pandemic. Through greater interoperability and closer collaboration, we can shorten the time it takes to develop new services using these technologies and make them available to many more customers over a wider geographical area.”
5G Future Forum releases first technical specifications to accelerate global adoption of 5G Multi-access

The 5G Future Forum, a group of global 5G leaders accelerating the delivery of Multi-access Edge Computing-enabled solutions around the world, will release its first technical specifications to its members in the third quarter of 2020 – a major step forward in enabling global interoperability for 5G and Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) deployment to deliver efficient and innovative services to end customers.  There are two major sets of technical specifications:

The “MEC Experience Management” technical specification defines a set of intent-based APIs for functional exposure of edge and workload discovery with potential expansion to include future MEC functions and capabilities which are driven by network intelligence

The “MEC Deployment” technical specification defines the set of specifications to enable hyperscalers and service providers to deploy and integrate global MEC physical frameworks, including facilities (e.g. power and cooling), monitoring, operational considerations, and security.

The 5G Future Forum was established in January 2020 by América Móvil, KT Corp., Rogers, Telstra, Verizon, and Vodafone to develop 5G interoperability specifications to accelerate the delivery of 5G and MEC solutions around the world. Over the past six months, the Forum’s founding members have been working to create the governance structure for the 5GFF, as well as develop both technical and commercial workstreams.

The technical specifications are the first outputs from the technical workstream, which brings together technologists from all member telecommunications service providers. They are designed for 5G telecommunication service providers, cloud service providers (‘hyperscalers’), OEMs, developers, and enterprises.

The specifications will be released in August 2020. Following release of the specifications, the Forum anticipates expanding its membership to qualified new entrants. Other topics are being planned among the existing members with publication timeframes to be communicated shortly.

“The 5G Future Forum was set up to unlock the full potential of 5G and MEC applications and solutions around the globe,” said Rima Qureshi, chief strategy officer, Verizon. “5G is a key enabler of the next industrial revolution, where technology should transform how we live and work through applications including machine learning, autonomous industrial equipment, smart cars and cities, Internet of Things (IoT) and augmented and virtual reality. The release of these first specifications marks a major step forward in helping companies around the world create a seamless global experience for their customers.”

“We are in the right direction to bring more innovation to our customers and start delivering new 5G services, which should increase the quality and enhance the user experience through the adoption of MEC”, said Daniel Hajj, América Móvil CEO, “We are pleased with this first achievement from the 5GFF Members to build the future for the 5G deployment.”

“The release of the first specification and whitepaper of 5G Future Forum ushers in a practical approach to put MEC solutions into the market. With this groundwork firmly in place,the 5GFF partnership should continue to further motivate rich 5G innovations in the MEC space where state-of-the-art technologies like AI and AR/VR are to be seamlessly integrated for more competitive services,” said Dr. Hongbeom Jeon, chief DX officer, KT Corp.

"The capabilities and potential benefits that 5G should bring to consumers and businesses around the globe are seemingly limitless, and the 5G Future Forum will help accelerate the delivery of this technology at a global scale,” said Jorge Fernandes, Chief Technology and Information Officer, Rogers Communications. “At Rogers, we are focused on building a strong ecosystem of partners and fostering commercial 5G development to fuel businesses, industries and drive Canada’s economy forward. The 5G Future Forum’s upcoming specifications are an important step in evolving the capabilities of 5G and mobile edge computing to help us deliver innovative technology solutions that will bring Canadian and global businesses the very best of 5G.”

Telstra’s Group Executive for Networks and IT, Nikos Katinakis, said this specification and whitepaper is an important step towards unleashing greater 5G capabilities for enterprise and consumers alike. “5G and edge compute have the potential to truly revolutionise how organisations operate and be a game changer for a range of applications. Telstra is proud to stand alongside these global 5G leaders in the 5G Future Forum and to be developing initiatives that bring mobile edge computing to life.”

Johan Wibergh, Vodafone Group Chief Technology Officer, said: “The speed and capacity of 5G, with the immediacy of MEC, can give economies the productivity boost needed to help them recover from the coronavirus pandemic. Through greater interoperability and closer collaboration, we can shorten the time it takes to develop new services using these technologies and make them available to many more customers over a wider geographical area.”

For more information on the technical specifications visit the 5G Future Forum webpage.
Vodafone and Nokia showcase 100 Gigabit Next Generation Broadband Network
  
  • Vodafone and Nokia record speeds of 100 gigabits-per-second in test of a new broadband network technology. 
  • 100 Gbps Passive Optical Network (PON) will power next generation cable and fibre broadband connections from 2030. 
  • 10 times faster than today’s multi-gigabit networks, supporting new immersive services and making sure customers never run out of broadband bandwidth. 
Imagine as a Vodafone customer being able to touch an object over the internet, share a meal with a 3D-holographic family member or even transmit the smell of a bunch of roses.
Vodafone has already demonstrated both a holographic call and the ability to feel a rugby tackle over 5G, and now it has teamed up with Nokia to successfully test a new network technology, running at the blistering speed of 100 gigabits-per-second (Gbps), which could pave the way for ‘teleportation over the Internet’ applications.

At a speed of 100 Gbps, researchers can feasibly imagine futuristic ‘virtual teleportation’ and 3D holographic applications that combine human senses to aid healthcare, education, retail and leisure activities. 100 Gbps is at least ten times faster than the most advanced fixed networks of this type in Europe today and is the equivalent of streaming 4,000 ultra-high definition videos into your home at the same time without lag or buffering.
Vodafone and Nokia engineers achieved the technological breakthrough using only a single optical wavelength - a beam of light used to transmit vast amounts of data - to record a top data speed of 100 Gbps. The test was carried out at Vodafone’s Eschborn lab in Germany using equipment based on a new flexible Passive Optical Network (PON) technology. A PON is a fibre network that connects key structures like mobile masts, schools, factories, hospitals and businesses to the internet as well as home broadband services.
While 100 Gbps PON tested at Eschborn is likely to become available later this decade, Vodafone is already installing 10 Gbps PON links within its Next Generation Networks (NGN) fixed-line infrastructure. These are capable of supporting the growing capacity demands of ultra-high definition Internet streaming services, typically requiring around 25 Mbps, as well as the most bandwidth hungry augmented and virtual reality services running at between 200 Mbps and 300 Mbps.
The technology is also based on a modular architecture, meaning that Vodafone can significantly upgrade the speeds of today’s fibre and cable broadband networks when required without the need to dig up roads or drill holes through a customers’ home.
Johan Wibergh, Vodafone Chief Technology Officer, said: “Today’s technological breakthrough supports Vodafone’s strategy to prepare our African and European networks to meet the inevitable growth in demand for faster, more responsive and immersive Internet services. We continue to focus on the current needs of customers like extending broadband to rural communities, supporting working and learning from home, and equipping smart factories, all while keeping an eye on the future.”
Vodafone’s European network now passes around 140 million homes across 12 markets through a mix of Vodafone owned NGN network (55 million homes, of which 39 million are Gigabit-capable), strategic partnerships (22 million homes) and wholesale arrangements (62 million homes). This network provides Vodafone with the largest marketable footprint of any fixed-line provider in Europe
Orange announces the opening of nine Orange 5G Labs to enable economic players to bring 5G uses to life


According to an Orange study conducted with GlobalWebIndex, 72% of companies currently say they expect their operator to provide support regarding 5G to test, experiment and develop ahead of time. The Orange 5G Labs initiative meets this demand and aims to help economic players to better understand the opportunities, value and utility of 5G. There, they will be able to test their current solutions and services and think about new uses while taking advantage of an ecosystem to co-innovate and already start changing their business model and processes.


“We believe that 5G will drive business competition and regional development. This is why Orange is involved in a co-innovation approach focused on 5G to create the uses of the future. Having a local presence close to these players is a key part of the Orange 5G Labs initiative, to support the digital transformation of economic players and to help everyone take advantage of 5G’s potential,” said Michäel Trabbia, Chief Technology and Innovation Officer at Orange.

Orange 5G Lab - sites close to local ecosystems
Orange is launching this initiative by opening a real network of Orange 5G Lab sites in France and abroad in 2021. It will be deployed in the regions to best meet the needs of local authorities and companies - start-ups, SMEs, big companies - regardless of their sector.

In France, seven sites will host all the companies and local authorities, regardless of their sector. The Orange 5G Lab site in Châtillon (Paris region) is opening today. The others will gradually open in six other French towns: Lille, Lyon-Charbonnières, Marseille, Paris-La Défense, Rennes and Toulouse.

Certain sites will specialise in a specific field but will not be devoted exclusively to this area. For example, the Lyon lab, located at the Campus Région du Numérique at Charbonnières-les-Bains, will be focused on Industry 4.0, and the Cœur Défense site in the Customer Innovation Centre will be more focused on Orange Business Services’ major clients.

The initiative will also be rolled out in European countries where the Group has a presence during the first half of 2021. An Orange 5G Lab will open in Bucharest in Romania in partnership with the University Politehnica of Bucharest to foster the development of commercial projects, research and innovation. In Belgium, the lab will be located near the Orange Industry 4.0 campus in the Port of Antwerp. In this Orange 5G Lab, different use cases that have already been developed in collaboration with industrial partners in the port will be demonstrated, such as the augmented worker or critical communication systems.
In addition, a 5G challenge for start-ups and developers will start in Spain at the end of February to develop new applications. The winners will be supported by the Orange 5G Lab initiative, including access to experts and 5G equipment in France.

Services and support provided to economic players
The services provided are based on:
•    a programme to learn about 5G and the uses made possible through demonstrations and activities. It is supplemented by a website - 5glab.orange.com and a series of thematic and educational webinars.
•    the opportunity for the players involved to test their products and services in a 5G environment ahead of their deployment or on the commercial network, under real conditions. They will be able to rely on 5G equipment of the future (augmented reality glasses, virtual reality headsets, routers, 5G devices, 5G modules). In addition to the 5G environment, Edge computing functionalities will also be provided in some Orange 5G Labs to test services requiring a shorter response time for instance.

The companies will be supported by Orange technical, network and product experts and the entire Orange 5G Lab ecosystem providing synergies and additional resources. In addition to the ‘bricks-and-mortar’ sites, virtual digital access will also be set up to enable all relevant players to effectively collaborate remotely.

Companies that are interested, regardless of whether they are Orange customers or not, can talk to their preferred contact or identify themselves on the 5glab.orange.com site.

The Orange 5G Lab initiative is a concrete illustration of the 5G communication campaign Orange has just launched: ‘The most innovative thing about 5G is what we’ll do with it’.
Much more than just gigabits: the promises of 5G

Networks are the foundation for the ongoing digital revolution. The global pandemic and ensuing economic crisis highlighted the vital importance of networks and the major role digital technology plays in our societies. And now they’re essential for driving a sustainable economic recovery.
Networks are also central to our activity at Orange, and they are key to us offering an unmatched customer experience. When it comes to 5G, we firmly believe it is vital tool for boosting business competitiveness and regional development.






The most innovative thing about 5G is what we'll do with it
In our European 5G campaign, children go on a pretend class trip to a museum, where almost anything is possible. As an exciting addition to our existing networks, 5G opens up a whole range of possibilities. Thanks to 5G, children can discover the museum as if they were actually there, enjoying a fun and immersive experience



E-learning is developing as a strong resource alongside traditional education and training solutions. Several pilots have shown that new technologies can strengthen the impact of teaching, in particular HD video, Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality. 5G plays a central role in terms of the enhanced connectivity needed to deliver this new blended learning ecosystem within schools, universities and business campuses.

All of these technologies supported by 5G have opened up huge possibilities in the world of vocational training as they can now interact in a simple and reliable way.
5G offers even greater advantages to VR and AR when used on smartphones, tablets and connected headphones because these applications can be delivered in a mobile context with the same speed and low latency offered by a fixed fibre network.
And 5G will offer exclusive advantages to students and teachers, in their various home and work settings, as well as on the move.






How will 5G impact e-health and connected medicine?
5G_ecologie
Reliable and ultra-fast, 5G will accelerate the development of predictive medicine, telemedicine, virtual consultations and home healthcare services. It will play a central role in how medical data is shared between healthcare professionals and connected equipment. It will also help advance the technologies that underpin future medicine and surgery such as loT, AI, Edge Computing, real-time video and Augmented Reality.

As Eric Pieuchot, in charge of the Operations and Transformation Department of Enovacom emphasised: “We’re going to move from curative medicine to predictive medicine, while preserving the human relationships that are so essential to this profession.”

True to our commitment to responsible and useful digital innovation, we’re a major player in the development of e-health, telemedicine and remote consultations.





Games, matches and events: how will 5G be at the heart of the action?
5G sport
5G is pushing the boundaries of live action for fans, spectators and gamers alike. The stadium can come alive once more thanks to multi-view capture, Virtual Reality apps and additional contextual, immersive and exclusive content.

Whether at the venue or watching remotely, audiences can enjoy a front row experience.

5G will enable a greater number of enhanced experiences, which you can discover through our trials at the Orange Vélodrome stadium in Marseille, at Roland Garros and soon at the 2024 Paris Olympics, a prime location for showcasing 5G sporting innovation.





How will 5G help drive Industry 4.0, the new industrial revolution?
5G et l'industrie
From 2023, 5G network developments will herald a new era for manufacturing and industry through the simultaneous transmission of massive data. We’re working with industry partners and major tech companies to design and build a whole range of innovative applications for the sector, made possible thanks to 5G.

Industry 4.0 is the digital reinvention of all links of the industrial value chain: from innovation to customer relationships or logistics. Thanks to AI (Artificial Intelligence), Edge Computing and IoT (Internet of Things), machines are learning. Maintenance can become predictive and technicians can use augmented reality as a valuable tool to navigate massive factories for inventory, inspections and other tasks.

In addition to the networks already in place, 5G is a complementary network that provides the enhanced connectivity needed to power the factory of the future.

Find out more about our pilot of the experimentation of Schneider electric, the first  factory in France to trial industrial 5G uses with Orange.

 Orange and Schneider Electric







How will 5G contribute to smart cities and the green transition?
5G_smartcities
Within smart cities, the 5G network will make it easier for people to travel around, regulate energy consumption and offer a host of new services to residents.

Sensors and equipment installed in urban networks and buildings can exchange data in real time. Data analysis and AI algorithms help authorities make decisions that improve life for end users. New services and uses are also emerging in the fields of mobility and IoT (LTE-M, LoRa, and soon 5G).

With 5G, we’re building a network that will adapt to rapid urbanisation, while offering greater security and energy efficiency, in keeping with the green transition.





How will 5G benefit connected vehicles and sustainable transport?
5G transport
Development in the field of connected cars and autonomous vehicles opens up new paths for optimising entire transport networks and introducing shared mobility strategies.

From cars to bikes, trains and lorries, 5G applications cover a wide range of vehicles, particularly when it comes to developing sustainable transport networks, shared mobility and smart cities. 5G allows for the real-time collection and processing of massive amounts of data from vehicles and infrastructure. Users will also benefit, as the time previously spent travelling by car is no longer wasted as commuters can access services and enjoy optimised end-to-end travel while avoiding emergency braking, risks of collision and unnecessary energy wastage.

Orange is firmly committed to developing key partnerships and pilot tests in the area of connected cars, autonomous vehicles and sustainable urban mobility.



Orange 5G Lab, the path of the new uses of 5G
Orange has launched a system to support economic players in their 5G innovation approach with the opening in 2021 of a genuine network of Orange 5G Lab areas in France and abroad.

Companies, start-ups and local authorities can discover the opportunities offered by 5G, test their current solutions and services in order to anticipate developments, confirm the benefits of Orange's 5G on their business environments and anticipate new uses.




5G, the new generation very high-speed network
The more powerful, intelligent and flexible 5G network will complement and modernise existing networks. Already deployed in several territories, 5G is essential for the competitiveness of countries by opening up the prospect of new uses for businesses and the general public.

It brings benefits in areas such as health, industry, smart cities, transport, education and entertainment.

5G is also a real lever of differentiation for companies in a context of strong international competition. Because it will be 10 times more energy efficient than 4G by 2025, 5G and digital will make a positive contribution to the environmental transition of businesses and society.



How does 5G contribute positively to environmental transition?











Some questions
Our role, as a trusted operator, is to shed a well-argued light on the questions that everyone is asking about new technologies.


5G and radio waves
Orange complies with all regulations in force when it comes to 5G and radio waves, having already applied them for previous generations of networks.

As with any new technology, 5G has raised its fair share of questions and concerns. To understand more, we’ve examined five misconceptions surrounding this new generation of very high speed network. Here are our findings.




5G,
do we really need it?


5G is mandatory in order to maintain the quality of the networks and support the development of current and future uses.

5G,
will new antennas be everywhere?

5G is mainly being deployed on our existing sites. Later, local needs may require a few additional antennas.

5G,
and what do we do with Fibre and 4G?

5G will complete and modernise existing networks: 4G and Fibre. Very high speed broadband is progressing everywhere to reduce the digital divide.
The mobile saga

In just 30 years, mobile phones have become integral to the lives of 7 billion people. Rarely has a technological innovation had such an impact. Personal, business and leisure uses are growing at such a rate that mobiles have left their mark on civilisation and even become an extension of ourselves...


How does a mobile work?
Have you ever wondered about the magic behind your alerts vibrating or texts going ‘ding’ in your pocket when you’re on the bus? Or how you can stream the latest episode of your favourite series when out and about? It all starts with your mobile device – whether smartphone, tablet or laptop. Each is a transceiver, designed to send and receive data via radio waves from a base station antenna. As with any radio, the signal range is limited. The role of an operator such as Orange is to deploy enough antennas so that you are connected in as many locations as possible. This is known as mobile coverage.

Data exchanged between the mobile and antenna is then routed by cables to our data centres. These process and direct the data to the right destination according to the requirement: for example another mobile network antenna, a fixed telephone network or an IP server. The principle is simple. However, to provide a seamless user experience, it requires the operator to have significant technical capabilities and expertise in science, computing, electronics, fibre optics and more...



Beyond technology: a social revolution
Since the first mobile networks appeared in the 1980s, we have certainly experienced some technical revolutions, but above all we've seen a world in transition. As our multi-country Observatory of Digital Uses shows, 61% of respondents stated that they are “never without my smartphone!”


5G


Since the start of the new millennium, with the arrival of 3G and then 4G, new individual and collective uses for mobile devices have emerged: from listening to music to streaming videos, filming or FaceTiming each other, all while on the move.
Mobile networks, because they facilitate internet access, have a huge impact on business sectors and city life. For example the entertainment sector is developing quickly: the fact that customers can access music and online games all over the world means the industry has to change to keep pace. Similarly, catering, banking, tourism, health, education and the service sector are all evolving very rapidly. New professions are also emerging that are helping to shape society. Finally, you can’t separate technological innovations and ways people use technology. The two dimensions co-exist and feed each other.


Why increase speeds?
It all comes down to new uses. The fact that we’re all using more screens has led to an explosion of video on demand services. At the same time, mobile networks are facing bandwidth-hungry services including virtual reality, augmented reality, immersive games, remote access to business apps and more. In addition, the Internet of Things relies heavily on mobile technologies to connect sensors, machines and vehicles.

The resulting volume of data transported by mobile networks is doubling every year. Avoiding saturation takes more than meeting coverage needs; it requires extra network capacity. That takes innovation: today’s 4G enables speeds of 10-80Mbps versus 2-42Mbps achieved by 3G and only 9Kbps reached by the first GSM 2G networks. Now 5G is on the scene it offers a quantitative jump in speed (up to 10 times faster) along with a host of qualitative benefits. Research into 6G is also just beginning.The_mobile_saga.rtf
Sustainable networks: aiming for net zero carbon

Our Engage 2025 strategic plan is guided by our ambition to demonstrate social and environmental best practice. To respond to the climate crisis, our priority is to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2040, 10 years earlier than the objectives set by the GSMA. Networks play a central role at a time when data uses and volumes continue to increase.




A pioneering commitment
With our sights set on 2025, we have renewed our Green IT&Networks (Green ITN) plan once again in order to improve the energy efficiency of our networks and information systems. We are pioneers in this area, driving an entirely new sector. We’ve been committed to sustainable innovation for several years, with actions that are measurable and upheld by an Environmental Management System framework that complies with international certifications. This proactive policy, supported by all of our teams, enabled us to meet the objective we set at the COP 21 in December 2015: to reduce our CO2 emissions by 50% per customer usage by 2020 (compared to a 2006 base). Indeed, we achieved this objective three years ahead of target.





Orange, recognised as going green
We have been classified on the 2019 A List according to the Carbon Disclosure Project (CPD). This is the benchmark international organisation for reporting greenhouse gas emissions.

Making the list means we’re one of the best-performing organisations in this area.





A complex energy equation
Our Green ITN programme has greatly contributed to this success: in 2019, despite the increase in traffic on our networks, we reduced our CO2 emissions by 4.2% compared to 2018. In total, over the period 2010-2019 the Green ITN program saved 2.7 million tonnes of equivalent CO2. Achieving net zero carbon by 2040 will require a considerable effort. Traffic carried on our networks continues to grow by 30% to 50% each year, and customers expect us to increase our capacity to support their everyday essential services.

However, we will continue to do everything we can to support the sector, knowing that digital technology has 12 times less CO2 impact worldwide than manufacturing, and 7 times less than transport or construction.



Green ITN action plan
Modernise electronic equipment to incorporate the latest eco-efficient technologies.

Deploy innovative architecture, for example passive cooling of data centres or activating “standby” mode on our networks.

Supply networks with renewable energy.

Use artificial intelligence and data to optimise the deployment and operation of infrastructure.

Measure consumption more precisely and reduce it where possible.

Share infrastructure with other operators to optimise use.

Carry out more research into eco-efficient networks and IT.


Networks running on renewable energy
One of our most significant activities has been to design and deploy solar-powered base stations. We were the first provider to do so in our industry, and it has now become a standard. To date, more than 2,800 solar sites have been deployed, mainly in the Middle East and Africa. We’re running a pilot in Jordan to create “three solar farms” which already cover a significant proportion of our energy requirements in the country.

We’ve also begun to deploy solar panels on base stations in Europe, in addition to using a local electricity supply. For example in Slovakia, a first set of 41 sites has been equipped with the aim of covering 5% to 10% of the country’s 2,000 sites by 2023.



Less electricity in data centres
Our data centres host network equipment and service platforms (TV, SMS, voice, Orange Money etc) as well as business applications and IT systems. They represent a large proportion of our energy consumption, which we are reducing in three main ways:

deploying 400 volt DC power supplies, which use less copper and generate less heat loss than the former 220 volt AC or 48 volt DC power supplies.

using passive air conditioning (free cooling) to cool servers using the ambient air.

virtualising computer services to increase their usage rate and decrease the number of physical machines required.


Energy efficiency central to 5G
Each generation of mobile technology has enabled networks to become more efficient: 4G consumes 10 times less electricity than 3G, which is 10 times more efficient than 2G.

The advent of 5G increases the potential further, starting in 2020 with double the efficiency but increasing up to 10 times in 2025 and 20 times by 2030. This is due to a combination of elements such as scaling up the network, improving signal processing and sharing infrastructure. This won’t fully offset the impact of traffic growth but it will contribute to us achieving zero net carbon in addition to other measures put in place through the Green ITN programme.


5G advanced sleep mode… driven by us!
5G’s energy efficiency stems in part from the network’s ability to enter deep sleep modes thanks to non-transmitting intervals (whereas 4G sends signals every millisecond even when there is no traffic).

This is an innovative feature for mobile networks and we pushed hard for it to be included in the standards set by 5G standardisation bodies.
“The most innovative thing about 5G is what we'll do with it”: Orange launches its new campaign
Orange launches its new communication campaign focussed on uses made possible by the 5G network. Broadcast starting today in Luxembourg and from Sunday 7 February 2021 in France. This campaign will raise the general public’s awareness of the sheer breadth of 5G use cases and areas of application.

The film, broadcast by Orange and produced by Publicis Conseil, illustrates how 5G can be used in education. The power of the networks enables pupils to visit a museum and interact with the most iconic works on display like never before.

The user experience guaranteed by the quality of Orange’s 5G network represents a turning point in virtual reality and augmented reality thanks to greater interactivity. Like education, culture and entertainment, healthcare, transport and so on will also benefit from the technological developments made possible by this network. For Orange, 5G is only powerful if it is useful to individuals, organisations, companies and, more generally, societies.

In addition to TV, this campaign will be deployed in the press and on social media with content revealing the infinite number of uses made possible by 5G.

On the launch of this campaign, Béatrice Mandine, Executive Director of Communication, Brand and Engagement at Orange said: “For Orange, 5G represents positive progress, as it will be useful to our society. Since its launch, most of the focus has been on its technical and functional aspects. We wanted to go beyond this dimension to raise the general public’s awareness about the countless uses made possible by this next generation network. Every sector will benefit from the positive contributions of 5G: healthcare, entertainment, industry, transport and so on. The most innovative thing about 5G is what Orange and its customers will do with it.”

Marco Venturelli, President overseeing creativity at Publicis Conseil: “We wanted to give this technology meaning, go beyond divides and show how it can be useful to everyone. We wanted to be as accurate as possible in this new film, which combines energy and foreshadows a positive future, something we all really need at the moment. A film that makes you feel good.”
5 technologies for responding to current and future challenges

Artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things, Cloud solutions… the technologies and concepts behind these terms are not always accessible. However, these innovations can make our lives easier in concrete ways and help us build a more resilient future. Here are 5 ways they can do just that.



#1 The Cloud can enable better access to education


The health crisis demonstrated the importance of remote learning to ensure educational continuity. A blended model of face-to-face teaching and remote learning will certainly continue after the crisis, hence the importance of adapted technologies. The French start-up Omnilive, for example, has developed a livestream cloud video solution that recreates the interactive experience of face-to-face teaching. The advantage of cloud solutions is their ease of use: there’s no need to install software or create an account, you just click to connect via a URL.


#2 AI can boost cybersecurity


Remote access, particularly to cloud solutions, poses cybersecurity challenges. To limit the risk of cyber attacks, companies can carry out audits to find vulnerabilities in their IT systems. Thanks to AI, it is possible to analyse how a company’s IT system will react by modelling typical interactions between users. Some companies, for example, offer a behavioural analysis tool capable of detecting system anomalies in order to prevent attacks and intervene quickly.


#3 IoT can help conserve energy


At the start of 2020, several high-level European authorities joined forces to present a roadmap on “Europe's digital future”, emphasising the importance of new technologies in the fight against climate change. Buildings or machines equipped with sensors make it possible to monitor and control energy consumption in real time. Smart switches, for example, can be installed on lighting systems in company premises. When the light is on in an empty room, the information is transmitted through the IoT network and processed in the cloud so that the light can switch off automatically to save energy.


#4 Low tech can help create local jobs l


Innovation can lead to obsolescence, replacing old technology with new, and therefore creating waste. This is not a very virtuous circle so the low tech approach is responding by asking the right questions upstream of the innovation process: “Is the environmental damage ‘worth’ the utility of the object or of the service provided?” “What is the shelf life of the product?” “Is it repairable, reusable, recyclable?” Low tech must therefore be useful, sustainable and accessible. This could mean reconditioning electronic devices or producing new ones from existing materials. This type of virtuous and greener initiative also promotes local employment.


#5 5G can accelerate telemedicine


The use of virtual doctor’s appointments has become widespread in recent months. Teleconsultation booths connected and activated remotely by doctors are gradually being established in pharmacies and in the workplace. The idea is that patients can take their blood pressure or temperature themselves while meeting the doctor virtually via video. Thanks to the increased speeds provided by the 5G network, the solution will become even more widespread, promoting access to healthcare, including in medical deserts. At the same time, 5G will also save precious time for emergency services and healthcare teams, by allowing the immediate exchange of medical information as soon as the patient is attended by paramedics in the ambulance.
5G deployment: where are we in terms of 5G?
From joint pilots to first licences and commercial deployments: where are we in terms of 5G?






How do we ensure careful 5G deployment?
To complement our existing networks, 5G roll outs are underway, but only where there is a firm need and only once we’ve taken all societal considerations and concerns into account. For instance, we’re gradually deploying 5G antennas on our existing 4G sites in Europe, mainly in urban areas and special economic zones, depending on available frequencies and changes in use. At the same time, we’re continuing to extend 4G coverage across our operating countries in Europe, Africa and the Middle East. The same is true for fibre and deploying our submarine cables or “information superhighways”.

Since 2020, we’ve been gradually rolling out our 5G antennas on 4G sites in areas where the network is in high demand (very densely populated areas for example). This significantly improves speeds for everyday outdoor use up to 2Gbps while enabling as many people as possible to stay connected.

By 2023, the 5G network core will also be accessible to the public network, improving performance further while allowing differentiated levels of service quality and security to meet the requirements of industry, connected vehicles, smart cities, e-health and more. 5G will support a greater number of connected devices within the Internet of Things (IoT*) to optimise industrial applications and processes, and enable greater reactivity to support real-time requirements such as online gaming, industrial robotics and ultimately self-driving connected cars.

* IoT allows devices on private internet connections to communicate with each other and the Internet of Things brings these networks together.



France, 3 February 2021 : Orange announces the opening of nine Orange 5G Labs to enable economic players to bring 5G uses to life
The Orange 5G Labs initiative aims to help economic players to better understand the opportunities, value and utility of 5G. There, they will be able to test their current solutions and services and think about new uses while taking advantage of an ecosystem to co-innovate and already start changing their business model and processes.






France, 26 November 2020: Orange launches its 5G network by making quality of service its priority
Orange announces the launch of its 5G network in 15 French municipalities, as of 3 December, 2020, including Nice, Marseille, Le Mans, Angers and Clermont Ferrand. By the end of the year, more than 160 municipalities will be covered with 5G.

Discover where we already offer 5G in France and where we will be extending our coverage in the coming weeks or months (in French).



Luxembourg, 23 November 2020: Orange is launching its 5G network along with a customer support programme (in French)
After confirming in October the evolution of its mobile plans to '5G Ready' without increasing the price for customers, Orange has announced the deployment of its 5G network in Luxembourg along with a customer information and demonstration campaign.






France, 1st October 2020 : Orange wins the broadest range of frequencies in France’s 5G auction.
With 90 MHz, Orange is the French operator with the broadest range of 5G frequencies. Orange is therefore strengthening its position as the No. 1 operator with the largest portfolio of frequencies on the French market.

Stéphane Richard, Orange CEO, said: “With these auctions, we have just taken an essential step forward in making the networks of the future a reality. We are very satisfied with the way this auction process went; the result is well balanced and encourages operators to invest. With 90 MHz of 5G spectrum, Orange will be able to consolidate its leadership in mobile networks and will develop an efficient 5G network, a guarantee of attractiveness and competitiveness in France.”

France, 28 September 2020: three innovative 5G demos at Roland Garros
Streaming of multiple video streams over 5G with OPPO: spectators can choose different viewing angles to feel closer to the action. Through OPPO’s Find X2 Pro flagship smartphone connected over 5G, visitors will enjoy an enriched experience through high definition video streaming and a choice of viewing options. Live interview captured and aired over 5G by France Télévisions: this is a great example of what 5G will offer to enable a live broadcast with very low latency to support this type of use. 360° video capture and broadcast via 5G: immersive 360° video capture and streaming via the OPPO Find X2 Pro smartphone to follow live matches from the Suzanne-Lenglen court.





In France, Orange has announced several co-innovation projects with:
LACROIX Group, around the electronic factory of the future and technical management in buildings (the use of sensors to measure and control temperature, water and more in real time).
Schneider Electric, with indoor factory 5G coverage and augmented reality solutions for real-time maintenance operations.
Olympique de Marseille football club, to anticipate the future needs of spectators and businesses within the Orange Vélodrome.

Spain, 7 September 2020:
5G launches in 5 city centres
Launching in Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, Seville and Malaga, 5G will initially cover 30% of each city, before expanding to more suburbs and extending to nine further cities across the country.





Spain, summer 2020:
Orange participates in three major pilots
Orange was selected to take part in three projects awarded by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation. We’re playing a leading role in pilots running in Valencia, Galicia and the Basque region.

Romania, August 2020:
Bucharest first city in Romania to benefit from 100% 5G coverage on the Orange network.
Bucharest becomes the first city in Romania to benefit from 100% 5G coverage on the Orange network.







Romania, end of 2019:
Orange contributes to several co-innovation projects.
Including a partnership with Continental to equip trucks travelling in convoys to optimise and secure road transport.

Luxembourg, 24 July 2020:
5G frequency allocation (2020)
“We are particularly pleased with the outcome of these auctions. We obtained 110 MHz on the 3.6 GHz band, which is the maximum, and this will enable us to provide our customers with the highest capacity to use or imagine the services of tomorrow. Network quality and customer experience are the pillars of sustainable development and will remain our priority. Orange Luxembourg, with the support of the Orange Group, is therefore definitively ready for 5G” says Corinne Lozé, CEO of Orange Luxembourg.






Poland, 1 July 2020: launch of #hello 5G, first step ahead of 5G frequency auctions
With #hello5G, Orange Poland has launched 5G-style services to 6 million customers in close to 400 cities.

Belgium, December 2019 and January 2020:
Industry 4.0 Campus covered by 5G (2019).
In December 2019, Orange announced the launch of an Industry 4.0 Campus based on a 100% 5G test network deployed in the Antwerp port area.
Orange launches its 5G network by making quality of service its priority

Orange announces the launch of its 5G network in 15 French¹ municipalities, as of 3 December, 2020, including Nice, Marseille, Le Mans, Angers and Clermont Ferrand. By the end of the year, more than 160 municipalities will be covered with 5G.


This 3.5GHz 5G launch brings speeds up to three to four times faster than 4G to meet changing customer needs. Only 3.5GHz frequencies allow a true 5G experience.

5GFrance


Orange is thus fulfilling its role of a leading operator by providing the best possible support for the evolution of French consumption patterns, allowing them to benefit from the best possible network quality, even in the densest areas. By contributing to the digitisation of French companies, 5G will also be a powerful lever for competitiveness, thanks to, among other things, connected objects and artificial intelligence. 5G, deployed in 3.5GHz frequency bands, allows for real browsing comfort, reduced latency and almost instantaneous download speeds, even on the move.

Stéphane Richard, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the group, declared: “This new technology is a breakthrough innovation that will allow all of our customers, both individuals and businesses to benefit from unprecedented quality of service and to develop new uses. The deployment will be done gradually and in a constructive dialogue with all local authorities, in parallel with our efforts to expand coverage of the French territory in 4G. As a responsible operator, Orange is committed to offering the best to its customers to meet their growing connectivity needs, thanks to more efficient technology that is more energy efficient.”

A gradual deployment of the 5G network

On 1 October, during the auction, Orange obtained the largest share of the frequency blocks involved, with 90 MHz of spectrum. This deployment focuses mainly on these new 3.5GHz frequencies and may be supplemented by the use of 2.1GHz² frequencies.



¹A covered municipality is a municipality whose outdoor population coverage rate is greater than or equal to 80%.
 ²Theoretical maximum reception speeds up to 2.1Gbit/s in areas covered by the 2100Mhz band used for 4G. 5G accessible with compatible offer and device



The operator has chosen to initially cover areas that are already heavily used in order to avoid any risk of saturation. In fact, between September 2019 and September 2020, data usage on Orange and Sosh tariff plans increased by 40%, carrying a risk of saturation of the current networks by 2022. This is why the use of these new 5G frequencies, according to Orange is the best answer for the future.

In addition, Orange enables its customers to benefit from the best mobile network, according to ARCEP¹ in 2019.

Orange is continuing its efforts in parallel in the deployment of 4G, with an objective of switching 100% of Orange sites to 4G by the end of 2020.

5G, an asset of the energy transition

5G is the first mobile standard that integrates the optimisation of energy consumption into its design. A key element of this increased efficiency is that the antennas activate only on-demand, that is to say, they only transmit in the direction of the devices, only when they are needed. By reducing the transmission of signals to the essential, the 5G network is more energy efficient than 4G: it can absorb much more data traffic while controlling the energy consumption².

5G is also becoming an asset for energy transition by promoting the advent of IoT³: it paves the way for smarter management and optimisation of resources in the home, in cities, in industry and even in agricultural management.

The 5G standard natively incorporated higher security requirements than previous generations, in particular on the encryption of radio communications between the antenna and the core networks.
Orange wins the broadest range of frequencies in France’s 5G auction

Orange is satisfied with the results of the 3.5 GHz auction process in France, which represents a crucial step forward that will shape the Group’s operations in France for the years to come.

The acquisition of these frequencies is an essential industrial investment that will maintain and strengthen the position acquired by Orange as a leader in mobile networks and to consolidate, with the deployment of a 5G network using these frequencies, its No. 1 position for the benefit of its customers, both retail and B2B.

With 90 MHz, Orange is the French operator with the broadest range of 5G frequencies. Orange is thus strengthening its position as the No. 1 operator with the largest portfolio of frequencies on the French market: 257 MHz of frequencies in total*.

The total price of the 90 MHz acquired by Orange is € 854 million, with payments spread over 4 to 15 years depending on the block.

Orange has attained this leadership in 5G frequencies for a tightly-controlled total amount, testifying to the rigorous management of its resources. This effort has enabled the Group to preserve its ability to invest in the deployment of fibre networks and in the improvement of 4G coverage in rural areas, bringing very high speed broadband across the country.

It is also notable that the total amount remains reasonable compared to other large European countries, such as Germany.

These frequencies in the core 5G band will make it possible to fully exploit this technology and to offer new high-performance services to individuals and businesses. By providing 10 times greater spectral and energy efficiency, these frequencies will also support growth in uses throughout the current decade. The amount of spectrum that Orange has obtained in this band will allow it to offer the best 5G experience to its customers.

Commenting on these results, Stéphane Richard, Chairman and CEO of Orange, said: “With these auctions, we have just taken an essential step forward in making the networks of the future a reality. We are very satisfied with the way this auction process went; the result is well balanced and encourages operators to invest. With 90 MHz of 5G spectrum, Orange will be able to consolidate its leadership in mobile networks and will develop an efficient 5G network, a guarantee of attractiveness and competitiveness in France ".
