Global 5G wireless deal threatens weather forecasts
Meteorologists say international standards for wireless technology could degrade crucial satellite measurements of water vapour.


Water vapour over the continental United States is shown in this satellite image from the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Credit: NOAA/GOES
The international agency that regulates global telecommunications agreed to new radio-frequency standards on 21 November. Meteorologists say the long-awaited decision threatens the future of weather forecasting worldwide by allowing transmissions from mobile-phone networks to degrade the quality of Earth observations from space.
Wireless companies are beginning to roll out their next-generation networks, known as 5G, around the world. The new agreement is meant to designate the radio frequencies over which 5G equipment can transmit. But some of the frequencies come perilously close to those used by satellites to gather crucial weather and climate data. To keep the signals from interfering with one another, researchers have proposed turning down the amount of noise allowed to leak from 5G transmissions.
Negotiators at a meeting of the International Telecommunication Union in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, agreed to introduce two stages of protection for frequencies near 24 gigahertz — a range close to those that weather satellites use to detect the amount of water in the atmosphere. Companies that operate 5G networks will have a relatively loose standard from now until 2027. After that, the regulation will get stricter. The idea is to let 5G companies start building networks now, and then to add more protection for Earth observations as 5G transmissions become denser.
But having eight years with relatively lax regulation is “of grave concern” to weather forecasters, says Eric Allaix, a meteorologist at Météo-France in Toulouse who heads a World Meteorological Organization (WMO) group on radio-frequency coordination. The WMO is so upset that it read a statement of concern into the meeting minutes, he says.
“The race for 5G is going to go fast,” says Renée Leduc, a consultant with Narayan Strategy in Washington DC who works on spectrum-sharing issues. “In the early-to-mid-2020s we’re going to see a very quick uptick.” Although more protections for Earth observations will take effect in 2027, “I’m still really concerned about the time period between now and then”, she says.
Buffer zone
The 5G transmissions will involve many frequencies, but the key one under discussion is 23.8 gigahertz. Water vapour in the atmosphere naturally produces a weak signal at this frequency, which satellites use to measure humidity. Those data feed into weather forecasts. But if a 5G station is transmitting a signal near the 23.8-gigahertz frequency, a weather satellite might pick it up and interpret it as water vapour. And that bad data could degrade forecasts.
Meteorologists say that the problem is manageable, but only if there is enough of a noise buffer between the 5G transmissions and the water-vapour signal. The buffer is measured in units of decibel watts, and is akin to a measure of how much you might turn down the volume of your stereo so as not to bother your neighbours.
In the run-up to the Egypt conference, meteorologists, the wireless industry and government regulators have been tussling about how to define an appropriate level of interference. The WMO had been pushing for the biggest buffer, of –55 decibel watts. European regulators had settled on a less-stringent recommendation of –42 decibel watts for 5G base stations. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission had advocated a much looser restriction, at just –20 decibel watts — which would have allowed more than 150 times more noise than the European proposal.
The new standard hews closest to the European recommendation: it is –33 decibel watts until 1 September 2027, and –39 decibel watts after that.
“These two values were set by long negotiations between the member states,” said David Botha, a counsellor with the International Telecommunication Union, at a 22 November media briefing. “These values were considered to be adequate, in the sense that they would provide protection to the weather satellite systems, to Earth-exploration satellite systems. We have nevertheless noted that there were concerns that were issued.”
Forecasting trouble
Even the stricter level is not enough to avoid interfering with water-vapour measurements, says Leduc. “Thirty-nine is still not where we need to be,” she says. A study conducted by NASA and the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration found that 5G base stations needed to transmit with a noise buffer of –52.4 decibel watts to protect the water-vapour observations.
Weather forecasters will have to figure out how to mitigate the impacts on satellite observations — perhaps by working with the wireless industry to research ways to shut down or redirect 5G transmissions when a satellite is making its measurements. Botha said that the new agreement requires a “continued monitoring” of how 5G networks affect weather observations, but he provided no details on what that monitoring would involve or what the consequences would be if the weather data are degraded.
Other agreements reached this week in Sharm El-Sheikh include how quickly big fleets of satellites must launch (to avoid hogging the radio-frequency spectrum) and on what frequencies ‘pseudosatellites’ (such as high-altitude dirigibles and drones) can transmit.
Head of NOAA says 5G deployment could set weather forecasts back 40 years. The wireless industry denies it.
Government agencies are at an impasse on how to proceed.

What if, suddenly, decades of progress in weather prediction was reversed and monster storms that we currently see coming for days were no longer foreseeable? The toll on life, property and the economy would be enormous. Yet the government’s science agencies say such a loss in forecast accuracy could happen if the Federal Communications Commission and the U.S. wireless industry get their way.

Both the FCC and the wireless industry are racing to deploy 5G technology, which will deliver information at speeds 100 times faster than today’s mobile networks. But scientists have found this technology could interfere with critical satellite data used in weather forecasting, pitting the interests of science and safety against a pressing national priority.
The FCC and the government’s science agencies, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and NASA, have battled over this issue for several years.
AD


Both sides agree that American advancement and leadership in 5G is critical, but talks break down when it comes to how much the technology might affect weather data and the acceptable level of any interference.
Last week, Neil Jacobs, the acting head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, told Congress that 5G interference could set the accuracy of weather forecasts back 40 years.
Yet on Tuesday, CTIA, the trade group representing the U.S. wireless communications industry, unleashed a scathing rebuttal of the Jacobs’ assertion.
“It’s an absurd claim with no science behind it,” wrote Brad Gillen, CTIA’s executive vice president, in a blog post.

Gillen maintained that the NOAA claim relies on the study of a microwave sensor “that never went into use.” (The study, a collaborative effort between NOAA, NASA and the FCC, still under deliberation, is not public. CTIA said in an email it reviewed a draft copy that was posted on NASA’s website but has since been removed.)
AD

The never-used sensor was slated to fly on satellites that were part of a government program (called NPOESS) dissolved in 2010.
“[W]e are risking our 5G leadership over protecting mothballed decade-old government systems,” Gillen wrote.
Jordan Gerth, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, called CTIA’s blog post both “misleading” and “misinformed.” He noted that the canceled sensor was replaced by a similar one currently flown on two NOAA satellites while international agencies also fly such instruments.

These microwave sensors, Gerth wrote in an email, transmit important water vapor data at a frequency of 23.8 gigahertz, where they are potentially vulnerable to interference. In March, FCC auctioned off spectrum for wireless transmission in the adjacent 24 gigahertz band.
The proximity of the two bands could expose the water vapor data to out-of-band emissions deeming them unreliable. Gerth said “it is undisputed” that this water vapor data is necessary for weather prediction models “to produce the most accurate forecast.”

(AMS Weather Book) (AMS Weather Book)
In an email, CTIA countered that the newer sensors are “far less susceptible to interference” than the sensor evaluated in the study.
AD


But, testifying before the House Science Committee on May 16, Jacobs told members of Congress that the interference could result in a 30 percent reduction in forecast accuracy. “If you look back in time to see when our forecast skill was roughly 30 percent less than it was today, it’s somewhere around 1980,″ he said.
With this reduced forecast skill, the European model would not have predicted 2012′s Superstorm Sandy hitting the Northeast coast several days in advance, Jacobs said. Instead, the model would have steered the storm out to sea. Lead time to prepare for the storm would have been cut short.
Jacobs added that if the data loss from interference reaches even 2 percent, NOAA would likely have to “stop work” on its $11 billion polar-orbiting satellite program, important for not just weather forecasting but also for climate monitoring and many other applications.
AD


Gillen wrote NOAA’s predictions about 5G interference “are wrong on the merits, on the facts, and on the process,” but both NASA and the Department of Defense support NOAA’s conclusions and have expressed concerns about their potential consequences.
“[T]he assessments that NASA has done in conjunction with NOAA have determined that ... there is a very high probability that we are going to lose a lot of data,” NASA’s administrator, Jim Bridenstine, told the House Science Committee.
In March, the Navy wrote a memo stating the data interference would lead to “a probable degradation of weather and ocean models” resulting in “increased risk of ... degraded battlespace awareness for tactical/operational advantage.”

The sweeping implications of the data loss and effects on forecasting have drawn the attention of both Republicans and Democrats in Congress.
AD

“NASA took us to the moon, and NOAA helped us explore the depths of the ocean,” said Sen. Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.) in a statement to The Washington Post. “We rely on these agencies for scientific expertise, and they have warned us about the dire impact of this spectrum sale on weather forecasting capabilities — we should listen.”
Comments from Rep. Frank D. Lucas (R-Okla.), the top Republican on the House Science Committee, struck a similar chord.
“There is only one frequency we can use to observe water vapor in the atmosphere and auctioning off nearby frequencies could interfere with our predictions,” said Heather Vaughan, a spokeswoman for Lucas. “We all support the faster and more reliable connections we’ll get from 5G, but we need to deploy it in a way that doesn’t diminish critical weather forecasting.”
A major meeting of the world’s spectrum regulators is set for this fall, during which limits on out-of-band emissions will be negotiated. The State Department is currently trying to build a consensus U.S. position between NOAA and NASA on one side and the FCC on the other. All indications are that the sides remain far apart.
Could your next cell phone wreck our weather forecasts?
Faint signals from water vapor power our super-accurate forecasts—and if we’re not careful, scientists warn, 5G could drown some of them out.


In 2012, Hurricane Sandy came barreling down on the East Coast. It slammed into the New York region and sat there for several days, dumping torrential rain that caused over a hundred deaths, flooded entire communities, and wrecked local infrastructure.
The destruction almost certainly would have been higher without the detailed, precise forecasts of how the storm would proceed along its track, which scientists were able to feed to emergency management personnel well before the storm made landfall.
Meteorological science has gotten better and better over past decades, squeezing ever more information out of the data gathered at Earth’s surface, through the atmosphere, and from instruments mounted on satellites spinning overhead. The result is increasingly sophisticated, far-reaching, and accurate forecasts.
But the precision we’ve become accustomed to from those forecasts may be under threat, scientists are warning. Our ability to predict with confidence what’s coming down the road weather wise could be set back by 40 years, and a key forecasting tool could be seriously degraded.
Telecommunications technologies like 5G internet need space on the electromagnetic spectrum, the range of all types of electromagnetic radiation that includes microwaves, infrared and ultraviolet light, gamma and X-rays. Today that space is at a premium. And much of the information that feeds into sophisticated weather models comes from parts of the spectrum that are right next door to areas telecommunications companies want to use for the new technologies.
“It’s like an apartment building of sorts,” explains Jordan Gerth, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. “There’s some general expectation that everybody keeps relatively quiet. In the spectrum land, we have our meteorological application, our science applications, and those that require a very quiet environment and adjacent environment. But the telecom signals are typically very loud, and are also susceptible to leaking outside their space.

“It’s like trying to run a daycare for small children who want to take a nap, but one that’s adjacent to a sports bar. There may be a wall between them, but you’re still going to get noise bleeding through.”
Over the past month delegates from countries and trade groups have gathered at the World Radiocommunications Conference to decide on international rules about how strictly to protect the “bands” of the electromagnetic spectrum crucial to weather forecasting—in other words, how much noise from the sports bar they’ll allow to be heard in the nap room.
In the end they came to a decision that some scientists—including Jim Bridenstine, the administrator of NASA—say may degrade the forecasts in a dangerous way, perhaps irreparably.
What’s at stake
One of the crucial bands, says William Blackwell, an atmospheric scientist and engineer at MIT, is around 23.8 GHz. Water vapor absorbs in this microwave band, leaving behind a faint signal that can be read by satellite-mounted instruments that look at the microwave part of the spectrum. The problem now is that telecommunications companies are interested in using parts of the spectrum right next to that water vapor signal.
The electromagnetic spectrum is like water in a river: There’s only so much of it. Some of the water is necessary to keep the habitat healthy, just like some of the spectrum is necessary for making weather forecasts. But most of the rest of the spectrum has already been allocated for all different kinds of wireless communication—GPS, radio navigation, satellite controls, telecommunications, and more. So demands on the remaining clear bits are growing.
“The reason we’re in this tug of war, it’s because of all these cell phones, just like the one that I’m holding,” says Tom Ackerman, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Washington.
In the past, the communications uses were kept far away from the bands used for weather and climate science work.

“But we’re running out of spectrum real estate,” says Ackerman. “Before, we could coexist nicely, but now the sandbox is full.”
Earlier this year, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission auctioned off part of the microwave spectrum right next to the 23.8 GHz water vapor band. Companies, eager for access to the new space, bid over $2 billion.
Prior to the auction, though, Jim Bridenstine, the administrator of NASA, warned that interference—“leaking” of the big 5G signal into the faint water vapor signal in the 23.8GHz band—could degrade forecast quality to levels not seen since before the microwave sounder era, in the mid-1970s.
At around the same time, NOAA’s acting deputy administrator, Neil Jacobs, told a congressional committee that telecommunications activity in the nearby parts of the spectrum could degrade forecasting accuracy by 30 percent, and could cause the lead time on forecasts of hurricanes to decrease by 2 to 3 days, he said.
They and other scientists asked for strict limits on how “loud” the next-door emissions could be—asking for something like the World Meteorological Association had suggested, a limit of -42 decibel watts (more negative numbers mean stronger limits). Instead, the FCC decided to use a limit of -20 decibel watts.
At the World Radiocommunications Conference this month, the decisions fell in between. The interference, decision-makers landed on, could be -33 decibel watts until 2027, at which point the limits would strengthen slightly to -39 decibel watts.
That’s better than what the FCC proposed, says Gerth, but still far from ideal. “This problem isn’t one that’s going to go away,” he says.
The leading trade group for the U.S. wireless industry, the Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association (CTIA), disagrees. Their executive vice president, Brad Gillen, wrote in a blog post that the NOAA and NASA analyses were based on the wrong microwave sounder instrument, and if more modern ones are considered, the problem goes away. But NOAA and NASA and the Navy disagree.

The internal NOAA and NASA studies analyzing this particular issue are not yet public, so non-government weather scientists are still unable to vet the claims directly.
The satellite era changed weather forecasting
A century ago, the best weather forecasts in the world were mostly well-informed guesswork. Cloud patterns and the feel of wind could provide hints about what the atmosphere might get up to in the next few hours, but looking beyond that was impossible. Today scientists can look more than a week into the future and make a solid prediction of what to expect: rain, snow, sunshine, hurricanes.
By the 1970s, scientists had built the bones of the weather forecasting system we know today. They had developed computer models that described the complicated physics that controls the way air flows around the atmosphere. The more they honed in on the details of the physics, the better their predictions got.
5G wireless may lead to inaccurate weather forecasts

This image shows leakage (unintended radiation from a transmitter into an adjacent frequency band or channel) from a 5G cellular network affecting sensors on weather satellites. Credit: Mohammad Yousefvand
Upcoming 5G wireless networks that will provide faster cell phone service may lead to inaccurate weather forecasts, according to a Rutgers study on a controversial issue that has created anxiety among meteorologists.
"Our study—the first of its kind that quantifies the effect of 5G on weather prediction error—suggests that there is an impact on the accuracy of weather forecasts," said senior author Narayan B. Mandayam, a Distinguished Professor at the Wireless Information Network Laboratory (WINLAB), who also chairs the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering in the School of Engineering at Rutgers University-New Brunswick.
The peer-reviewed study was published this month at the 2020 IEEE 5G World Forum, sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Fifth-generation cellular wireless technology (5G) stems from new, smarter ways to use the higher (mmWave) frequencies for mobile communications. This technology will revolutionize internet communication and telecommunication. It has faster connection times, increases the number of devices that can connect to a network and will be more widely available over the next two to three years, according to IEEE.
The Rutgers study used computer modeling to examine the impact of 5G "leakage"—unintended radiation from a transmitter into an adjacent frequency band or channel—on forecasting the deadly 2008 Super Tuesday Tornado Outbreak in the South and Midwest.
The signals from the 5G frequency bands potentially could leak into the band used by weather sensors on satellites that measure the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere and affect weather forecasting and predictions. Meteorologists rely on satellites for the data needed to forecast weather.
Based on modeling, 5G leakage power of -15 to -20 decibel Watts (a decibel Watt is a unit of power that describes the strength of radio waves) affected the accuracy of forecasting of precipitation (by up to 0.9 millimeters) during the tornado outbreak and temperatures near ground level (by up to 2.34 degrees Fahrenheit).
"It can be argued that the magnitude of error found in our study is insignificant or significant, depending on whether you represent the 5G community or the meteorological community, respectively," Mandayam said. "One of our takeaways is that if we want leakage to be at levels preferred by the 5G community, we need to work on more detailed models as well as antenna technology, dynamic reallocation of spectrum resources and improved weather forecasting algorithms that can take into account 5G leakage."
The lead author is Mohammad Yousefvand, a Rutgers electrical engineering doctoral student. Co-authors include Professor Chung-Tse Michael Wu in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Professor Ruo-Qian (Roger) Wang in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Joseph Brodie, director of atmospheric research in the Rutgers Center for Ocean Observing Leadership.
5G Networks Could Throw Weather Forecasting Into Chaos
The FCC is clashing with scientists who argue that 5G networks could interfere with weather sensors and compromise weather predictions.


IF YOU HAD a choice between a better, faster cell phone signal and an accurate weather forecast, which would you pick? That’s the question facing federal officials as they decide whether to auction off more of the wireless spectrum or heed meteorologists who say that such a move could throw US weather forecasting into chaos.
On Capitol Hill Thursday, NOAA’s acting chief, Neil Jacobs, said that interference from 5G wireless phones could reduce the accuracy of forecasts by 30 percent. That's equivalent, he said, to the quality of weather predictions four decades ago. “If you look back in time to see when our forecast scale was roughly 30 percent less than today, it was 1980,” Jacobs told the House Subcommittee on the Environment.
That reduction would give coastal residents two or three fewer days to prepare for a hurricane, and it could lead to incorrect predictions of the storms’ final path to land, Jacobs said. “This is really important,” he told ranking committee member Frank Lucas (R-Oklahoma).
LEARN MORE

The WIRED Guide to 5G
In March, the FCC began auctioning off its 24-gigahertz frequency band to wireless carriers, despite the objections of scientists at NOAA, NASA, and the American Meteorological Society. This week, Senators Ron Wyden (D-Oregon) and Maria Cantwell (D-Washington) wroteto FCC chair Ajit Pai requesting the commission stop companies from using the 24-GHz band until a solution is found, and to delay any more of the auction.

Jordan Gerth, a research meteorologist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, has been studying this issue as part of a group at the American Meteorological Society. He says that while the FCC can switch which regions of the spectrum it allocates to phone companies, forecasters are stuck. That’s because water vapor emits a faint signal in the atmosphere at a frequency (23.8 GHz) that is extremely close to the one sold for next-generation 5G wireless communications (24 GHz). Satellites like NOAA's GOES-R and the European MetOp monitor this frequency to collect data that is fed into prediction models for upcoming storms and weather systems.

“We can’t move away from 23.8 or we would,” Gerth told WIRED. “As far as 5G is concerned, the administration has a priority to put 5G on the spectrum, and they thought this was an OK place to do it. It's just close to where we are sensing the weather.” Gerth says that wireless carriers could turn down the power emitted by 5G cellphone transmitters so they don’t drown out the sensitive sensors on the satellite. NOAA and NASA want to limit the interference noise to a level closer to what is considered acceptable by the European Union and World Meteorological Organization.
NOAA’s Jacobs told the House committee that the number currently proposed by the FCC would result in a 77 percent data loss from the NOAA satellite’s passive microwave sounders. He also said that experts from the two agencies are trying to work out a compromise. “I'm optimistic we can come up with an elegant solution,” he told lawmakers Thursday.
In the meantime, Gerth says this issue probably won’t go away anytime soon. The FCC plans future 5G auctions for the radio frequency bands near ones used to detect rain and snow (36–37 GHz), atmospheric temperature (50.2–50.4 GHz), and clouds and ice (80–90 GHz). “This is not one and done,” Gerth added. “Today it's 23.8, tomorrow it's 36.”
The state department is negotiating with other nations over the interference level, which will be settled at a world radio conference in October. The FCC's 5G auction has reaped nearly $2 billion from both small and large wireless providers and is still underway.
5G mobile networks could interfere with signals from weather satellites in the neighbouring frequency band leading to forecasting errors, study warns
	•	US researchers modelled the impact that '5G leakage' would have on forecasting
	•	They used a tornado outbreak from February 2008 as a case study for modelling
	•	Interference would have thrown off precipitation forecasts by 0.9 millimetres
	•	Similarly, temperature predictions would have been out by 2.34°F, the team said

Signals from weather satellites could suffer from interference — leading to forecasting errors — thanks to how 5G mobile networks use similar frequencies.
This is the warning of researchers from the US, who modelled the impact of so-called '5G leakage' on forecasting of past weather events.
They found that interference from the high-speed mobile networks could alter forecasts of precipitation by up to 0.9 millimetres and temperature by 2.34°F. 

Signals from weather satellites could suffer from interference — leading to forecasting errors — thanks to how 5G mobile networks use similar frequencies (stock image)
'Our study — the first of its kind that quantifies the effect of 5G on weather prediction error — suggests that there is an impact on the accuracy of weather forecasts,' said paper author Narayan Mandayam of Rutgers University.

In their study, Professor Mandayam and colleagues modelled the impact of so-called 5G 'leakage' — a phenomenon in which emissions from a transmitter would accidentally encroach on neighbouring frequency bands used for other purposes.
They simulated the effects of this leakage on the forecasting of the '2008 Super Tuesday tornado outbreak', in which 87 whirlwinds were generated over a 15-hour period, with many hitting populated areas in Jackson, Memphis and Nashville.
The researchers found that the signals from the 5G frequency range have the potential to bleed out into the neighbouring bands used by the sensors on weather satellites to measure the amount of water vapour in the atmosphere.
This data is used by meteorologists to make weather forecasts — and so the leakage has the potential to upset their predictions. 
In fact, the team found that leakage from 5G networks in the order of 15–20 decibel Watts — a measure of the power of the radio waves — could have altered the precipitation forecast during the 2008 tornado outbreak by up to 0.9 millimetres.
In a similar fashion, temperature predictions for the ground level could have been thrown off by up to 2.34°F (1.3°C), the researchers have suggested.
5G likely to mess with weather forecasts, but FCC auctions spectrum anyway
FCC auctions 24GHz spectrum despite likely interference with weather satellites.
A US Navy memo warns that 5G mobile networks are likely to interfere with weather satellites, and senators are urging the Federal Communications Commission to avoid issuing new spectrum licenses to wireless carriers until changes are made to prevent harms to weather forecasting.
The FCC has already begun an auction of 24GHz spectrum that would be used in 5G networks. But Sens. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) and Maria Cantwell (D-Wash.) today wrote a letter to FCC Chairman Ajit Pai, asking him to avoid issuing licenses to winning bidders "until the FCC approves the passive band protection limits that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) determine are necessary to protect critical satellite‐based measurements of atmospheric water vapor needed to forecast the weather."
Wyden and Cantwell said that the "ongoing sale of wireless airwaves could damage the effectiveness of US weather satellites and harm forecasts and predictions relied on to protect safety, property, and national security." They chided the FCC for beginning the auction "over the objections of NASA, NOAA, and members of the American Meteorological Society (AMS). These entities all argued that out-of-band emissions from future commercial broadband transmissions in the 24GHz band would disrupt the ability to collect water-vapor data measured in a neighboring frequency band (23.6 to 24GHZ) that meteorologists rely on to forecast the weather."
The internal Navy memo on the topic, written on March 27 by Capt. Marc Eckardt, a Naval oceanographer, was made public by Wyden and Cantwell today.
The memo topic is "Operational impacts from potential loss of NOAA/NASA METOC [meteorology and oceanography] satellite data resulting from the FCC spectrum auction for 5G." The Navy memo summarizes the problem as follows:
“Partial-to-complete loss” of measurements
The Navy memo cited NOAA and NASA studies on interference from 24GHz spectrum, which is intended for mobile use and is adjacent to spectrum used for weather operations.
"[A]s such, it is expected that interference will result in a partial-to-complete loss of remotely sensed water-vapor measurements," the Navy memo said. "It is also expected that impacts will be concentrated in urban areas of the United States first."
The problem could affect Navy and Marine Corps forecasts of tropical cyclones as well as rain, ice, and snow, the memo said. The Navy memo recommends asking the FCC to "tighten out-of-band interference by reducing bleed-over limits to -57dB." The memo also says the Navy should "work with NOAA and NASA to continually assess and quantify actual impacts" and develop mitigations including "limited use of other channels, substitution of lesser-fidelity parameters, and the development of new techniques and algorithms through new research and development."
The Navy's concerns are shared by meteorologists quoted in a recent Nature article.
As Wyden and Cantwell told Pai, "Numerous scientists in the US and elsewhere, and several US federal agencies, have warned that allowing communications in the 24GHz band at the interference levels permitted by the FCC would substantially impact the accuracy of weather forecasts crucial to the Department of Defense (DOD), public safety officials, the commercial fishing industry, farmers, and millions of Americans who depend on accurate forecasts of floods, hurricanes, winter storms, and tornadoes."
Questions for Pai
Wyden and Cantwell asked Pai several questions, requesting answers by June 11. First, the senators asked Pai to provide evidence that 24GHz broadband transmissions "will not impact applications in adjacent frequency bands, particularly satellite measurements of water vapor in the 23.8 GHz band that is so important to weather forecasting." The FCC should provide "computer models, assumptions, and analysis" it used in making its decision, the senators wrote.
Wyden and Cantwell also asked Pai what the FCC will do if the International Telecommunication Union "refuses to accept" the FCC's emissions limits in the 24GHz band.
The senators also want Pai to provide a detailed explanation of the process it used "to resolve the dispute between NASA/NOAA and the FCC in favor of the FCC's position."
The senators' last request to Pai is as follows:
Explain and provide supporting documentation related to the FCC's public interest analysis, including any cost-beneﬁt analysis, on the FCC's emissions limit. In particular, explain how the FCC addressed the costs to taxpayers from the loss of billions of dollars of investment in weather-sensing satellites, the costs to public safety and national security, and to the nation's commercial activities that rely on this critical weather data.
We contacted Pai's office about the Navy memo and the Wyden/Cantwell letter today, and we will update this story if we get a response.

		
Man the ignorance is strong with you. Going full speed ahead on 5G doesn't require using 24 GHz. 5G can work on any frequency band between 600 MHz and 70 GHz. There are hundreds of frequency bands that can be used. No nation other than the US has planning on running 5G at 24 GHz due to interference concerns.
		
As for "aging American tech" the absorption of electromagnetic spectrum by water is based on physics not nationality. It isn't American sats which rely on this characteristic of water all weather sats use measurements at 23.8 Ghz. Water vapor's effect on a 23.8 Ghz signal is the same in China or Japan or Europe as it does in America. The sensors on weather sats measure changes in the 23.8 Ghz emissions to "detect water" indirectly. That is a pretty critical measurement for accurate weather prediction.
		
		
Measure of sensitivity in brightness vs physical characteristics. Notice something really interesting happens between 20 and 25 GHz. Light is very sensitive to changes in water vapor and much less sensitive to other changes. Might be a good frequency to use for measuring something like I don't know the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere. You can't measure water vapor in the atmosphere directly from a sat that is in orbit. You can only measure light indirectly so a frequency which is very sensitive to water vapor, not sensitive to other factors, and has no nearby noise sources would be critical. That frequency is 23.8 GHz.    
Global 5G Wireless Networks Threaten Weather Forecasts
Next-generation mobile technology could interfere with crucial satellite-based Earth observations


A satellite image of atmospheric water vapor over the U.S. Bright blue and white areas have high water vapor, while dark orange and brown mark drier air. Credit: NOAA
The U.S. government has begun auctioning off blocks of wireless radio frequencies to be used for the next-generation communications network known as 5G. But some of these frequencies lie close to those that satellites use for crucial Earth observations—and meteorologists are worried that 5G transmissions could interfere with their data collection.
Unless regulators or telecommunications companies take steps to reduce the risk of interference, Earth-observing satellites flying over areas of the United States with 5G wireless coverage won’t be able to detect concentrations of water vapour in the atmosphere accurately. Meteorologists in the United States and other countries rely on those data to feed into their models; without that information, weather forecasts worldwide are likely to suffer.
“This is a global problem,” says Jordan Gerth, a meteorologist at the University of Wisconsin–Madison.
The U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA are currently locked in a high-stakes negotiation with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which oversees U.S. wireless networks. NOAA and NASA have asked the FCC to work with them to protect frequencies used for Earth observations from interference as 5G rolls out. But the FCC auctioned off the first chunk of the 5G spectrum with minimal protection. The sale ended on 17 April and reaped nearly U.S.$2 billion.
SHARING THE SKY
Because the United States is such a large communications market, the decisions the government makes about how to deploy 5G are likely to influence global discussions on how to regulate the technology. Regulators from around the world will gather starting on 28 October in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, to hammer out international agreements for which frequencies companies will be able to use for 5G transmissions, and what level of interference with Earth-observation frequencies is acceptable.
Astronomers, meteorologists and other scientists have long worked to share the spectrum with other users, sometimes shifting to different frequencies to prevent conflicts. But “this is the first time we’ve seen a threat to what I’d call the crown jewels of our frequencies—the ones that we absolutely must defend come what may”, says Stephen English, a meteorologist at the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts in Reading, UK.
They include the 23.8-gigahertz frequency, at which water vapour in the atmosphere emits a faint signal. Satellites, such as the European MetOp probes, monitor energy radiating from Earth at this frequency to assess humidity in the atmosphere below—measurements that can be taken during the day or at night, even if clouds are present. Forecasters feed these data into models to predict how storms and other weather systems will develop in the coming hours and days.
But a 5G station transmitting at nearly the same frequency will produce a signal that looks much like that of water vapour. “We wouldn’t know that that signal is not completely natural,” says Gerth. Forecasts would become less accurate if meteorologists incorporated those bad data into their models.
NOISY NEIGHBOURS
The recent FCC auction involved 2 groups of frequencies: one between 24.25 and 24.45 gigahertz and the other between 24.75 and 25.25 gigahertz. Wireless equipment transmitting near the lower end of that range could interfere with the 23.8-gigahertz water-vapour measurement. The FCC did not respond to Nature's request for comment on the matter.
The situation is akin to having a noisy neighbour next door, Gerth says. If that person blasts music, a lot of the noise will probably bleed through the wall into your apartment. But if you can persuade the person to turn their music down, you’ll be able to sleep more peacefully.
Radio-frequency engineers measure noise in units of decibel watts. Regulators set controls that limit the noise allowed; more-negative numbers indicate increasingly stringent controls. The FCC auction set a noise limit on the US 5G network of –20 decibel watts, which is much noisier than the thresholds under consideration by almost every other nation for their systems. The European Commission, for instance, has settled on –42 decibel watts for 5G base stations, and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is recommending –55 decibel watts.

Many hope that the WMO numbers will influence regulators to adopt strict global noise standards at the meeting in Egypt. Because of how the scale is devised, the U.S. proposal would allow over 150 times more noise than the European proposal—and more than 3,000 times more than the WMO plan, says Eric Allaix, a meteorologist at Météo-France in Toulouse who heads a WMO steering group on radio-frequency coordination.
FUTURE FEARS
There’s relatively little research on exactly how bad weather forecasts could get as interference increases at 23.8 gigahertz and other frequencies crucial for Earth observations, says Gerth. “But the more we lose, the greater the impact will be,” he says.
NOAA and NASA have reportedly finished a study on the effects of differing levels of noise interference, but it has not been made public, despite at least one formal request from Congress. A 2010 report from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine concluded that losing scientific access to the 23.8-gigahertz signal would eliminate 30% of all useful data in microwave frequencies, which contribute significantly to global weather forecasts.
And not having atmospheric data from the United States can dramatically hurt forecasts for Europe, whose weather patterns are often steered by conditions over the United States 3–4 days earlier, says English.
The Department of Commerce, which oversees NOAA, said that it "strongly supports the administration's policy to promote U.S. leadership in secure 5G networks, while at the same time sustaining and improving critical government and scientific missions." NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine declined to comment, but spoke at length about his concerns over 5G at an agency meeting earlier this month. "This is a big deal," Bridenstine said.
The FCC plans to begin its next 5G auction, which will be the country’s largest ever, in December. It will involve three more frequency bands—some of which are used for satellite observations of precipitation, sea ice and clouds.
