Healing Frequencies of the Human Body: Full List and Benefits

Humans have understood for centuries that sound has a profound effect on the human body and mind. Ever since our discovery of music and shamanistic chanting, we have been pushing the boundaries of how the healing effects of sounds and frequencies can be measured. 
So what are the healing frequencies of the human body? Certain frequencies of sound are used as part of therapies in order to manipulate human brainwaves to promote healing of the body and mind. Sound frequency healing has been used to treat several different kinds of ailments such as insomnia, anxiety, depression, and disorders of the nervous system.  
Acoustic therapies are becoming more and more popular as a means to promote self-healing within the body. Keep reading to learn more about what sound frequency healing is and how it works. 
We break this article down into a series of helpful sections:
Article Topics

	.	What is Sound Frequency Healing? 
	.	The Healing Frequencies of the Human Body: Full List & Benefits  
	.	What Areas of Human Medicine are Healing Frequencies Practiced? 
	.	How Is Sound Healing Supposed to Work?   
	.	Solfeggio Frequencies 
	.	Ways Sound Frequency Healing Can Improve Your Health 
What is Sound Frequency Healing?
For hundreds of years, scientists have been conscious of the effect of sound on the human body. It has been shown by scientific study that even inaudible high-frequency sounds can have an effect on human brain activity. 
Likewise, holistic healers have recognized that different frequencies of sound have the ability to manipulate the human consciousness and even induced an altered consciousness, as can be seen by the trance states induced by shamanic chanting and drum work. 
The drumming vibrations that accompany shamanistic trance work speak to the power of harnessing sound frequencies to induce altered mind states. The Solfeggio frequencies have been associated since ancient times with the creation of sacred music (including meditation music) thought to promote healing. 
Even as far back as ancient Greece, healing and music have been linked together to both theology and medicine in the form of Apollo. And in the modern age, sound frequency healing can be achieved through a variety of methods, from listening to recordings of different binaural frequencies to participating in vibrational-acoustic therapies. 

Frequencies: Sounds of Healing
Stream on Amazon Music

How Do Frequencies Affect the Human Body?
While the concept that sound frequencies can actually alter human consciousness and promote healing sounds a bit far-fetched, it actually has lots of sound scientific evidence behind the theory. Exposure to different frequencies can alleviate psychiatric issues such as depression or anxiety as well as stimulate the body to heal physical ailments by way of genetic signaling. 
Going back to ancient Greece, the famous physician, philosopher, and mathematician Pythagoras was convinced that frequencies had a healing effect on the body and that daily exposure to music was beneficial for human health. Pythagoras was also responsible for discovering the harmonic relationships between mathematical ratios and different musical chords.  
Sound Therapy in Modern Times
Even though humans have been studying the connection between healing sound frequencies and the operation of the human body since the times of Pythagoras, modern scientists are just as fascinated by the effects that different frequencies can have on the mind and body. 
Aside from healing sound frequencies, frequencies also affect the body through music. Music can evoke an emotional response in the human body that can result in everything from goosebumps to a flood of cathartic tears. Vibrational instruments such as singing bowls and gongs are used to create ripple-like waves of vibrations that are meant to reset the consciousness. 
Here are some of the instruments frequently used in sound frequency therapy: 
	▪	Hammered dulcimer
	▪	Singing bowls
	▪	Gongs
	▪	Windchimes
	▪	Pan flutes
	▪	Hang
	▪	Didgeridoo
	▪	Kalimba
	▪	Djembe
	▪	Rainstick
	▪	Drums
The Healing Frequencies of the Human Body: Full List & Benefits 
While sound and frequencies are used to impact human health in several ways, there are specific frequencies that are regarded in alternative medicine to be particularly healing to the human body. Here is a list of those frequencies that are generally considered to have healing properties: 
40Hz
Flickering lights and sounds at 40 hertz have been used in Alzheimer’s therapy studies to stimulate an increased neural response and fight symptoms of dementia. Sound at 40 hertz has been linked to gamma brain waves and the stimulation of memory. For an example of 40 hertz therapy, see the video here.
174Hz
174 hertz is one of the Solfeggio frequencies, a series of tones used in sacred music that is believed in alternative medicine to have different positive effects on human health. 174 hertz is associated with the reduction of both pain and stress.  For an example of 174 hertz therapy, see the video here.
285Hz
285 hertz is also one of the Solfeggio frequencies and is considered instrumental in the healing of cuts, burns, and other physical wounds. 285 hertz sound frequencies are supposed to activate the body into cellular regeneration, encouraging it to heal itself in the event of an injury. For an example of 285 hertz therapy, see the video here.
396Hz
This sound frequency is associated with the removal of fear and other negative feelings. As one of the Solfeggio frequencies, the 396 hertz tone aids in the removal of the feeling of guilt, making it an effective addition to spiritual music. 396 hertz frequencies balance the root chakra while simultaneously transforming negative emotions such as grief into positive, joyful ones.  For an example of 396Hz healing, see the video here.
417Hz
Instead of a focus on physical ailments, healing sound therapy involving 417 hz (another of the Solfeggio frequencies) focuses on the removal of negative energy such as the energy surrounding a past trauma or negative energies in the ambient environment. 417 hertz therapy is designed to dissolve emotional blockages and activate the sacral chakra. For an example of 417 hertz therapy, see the video here.
432Hz
432 hertz therapy is aimed at the heart chakra and listening to a 432 hertz frequency is supposed to lead to greater levels of mental and emotional clarity. A 432 hertz tuning is considered optimal for tuning opera singers and is associated with a higher level of spiritual development. For an example of 432 hertz therapy, see the video here.
440Hz
Music that is tuned to the 440 hertz versus 432 hertz is considered “cerebral” music that aids in the listener’s cognitive development. Sound frequencies at 440 hertz are considered to activate the third eye chakra. For an example of 440 hertz sound frequency, see the video here.
528Hz
Also known as the love frequency, 528 hertz is one of the most well-known and popular of the Solfeggio frequencies. This musical tone is also known as the “miracle note” and has been used in native populations as a sound associated with blessings since before written history. For an example of 528 hertz sound therapy, see the video here. 
639Hz
639 hertz is a sound frequency that affects the heart chakra. This sound frequency is associated with therapy intended to produce positive feelings and greater attunement to harmonious interpersonal relationships. As therapy, 639 hertz exposure encourages clearer communication practices and situational awareness. For an example of 639 hertz sound therapy, see the video here.
852Hz
852 hertz sound therapy is a tone that is associated with redirecting the mind away from overthinking, intrusive thoughts, and negative thought patterns. These patterns of thought play a larger role in depression and anxiety. Exposure to this sound frequency can help alleviate the role of negative thoughts in these psychological ailments. For an example of 852 hertz sound therapy, see the video here. 
963Hz
963 hertz sound frequencies are associated with activation of the pineal gland and higher spiritual development. The 963 hertz frequency is known as both the “pure miracle tone” and the “frequency of the gods”. 963 is associated with the activation of the crown chakra and a connection to the source of all humanity. For a sample of 963 hertz sound therapy, see the video here. 
As you can see, there are many different sound frequencies that can be used in a healing application to both change cognitive thought processes associated with psychiatric illness as well as produce physical healing effects to counteract an illness or injury. 


Vibrational Healing
Stream on Amazon Music

What Areas of Human Medicine are Healing Frequencies Practiced?
While the effectiveness of healing frequencies is disputed by some scientists, there is no doubt that musical instruments are able to produce frequencies capable of shifting human consciousness. This is why mystics and musicians have been tapping into this powerful manipulation of sound frequencies to move crowds for hundreds of years. 
Sound healing has been explored in the following areas of human medicine: 
	▪	Stroke recovery therapy: Music therapy given to stroke victims has been shown to increase the speed of recovery of basic motor functions and speech.  
	▪	Hospital settings: Musical frequencies have been shown to reduce anxiety and promote higher morale in high-stress hospital and medical settings.
	▪	Enhancement of acupuncture: Along with colored light therapy, the use of tuning forks in conjunction with acupuncture has been shown anecdotally to be more effective than the use of acupuncture alone.
	▪	Cancer treatment without surgery: Scientists have only recently discovered that high-frequency noise can be used to attack and destroy cancer cells while eliminating the need for surgery that puts the patient at risk of post-surgical complications.
	▪	Autistic sensory therapy: Some autistic children have been shown to react positively to sound therapy exposure.
	▪	Brain wave entrainment: Touted among experts in alternative medicine as an effective way of treating a variety of ailments, brain wave entrainment involves exposing the brain to different sound frequencies to address a variety of cognitive issues from headaches and stress to premenstrual symptoms and chronic pain.
	▪	Altering stress hormones: Musical frequencies have long been used for therapeutic purposes to calm people who are angry, frustrated, or stressed.
	▪	Increased neurogenesis: Both in unborn infants and the elderly suffering from dementia, the use of healing frequencies and musical therapy have been used to promote neural health, reduce stress, and promote memory.  A similar approach to stress reducing that is gaining popularity is Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction.  (Check out this article for the best MBSR courses online)
	▪	Enhancement of physical rehabilitation programs: Those individuals who are undergoing physical rehabilitation experience have been shown to experience improved results when exercising to a playlist of music that motivates them.
	▪	Decreased pain perception: For those patients who have to deal with chronic pain issues, musical therapy has been associated with decreased pain perception and is an effective method for pain management that does not involve medication. 
There are so many applications for sound and frequency therapy being discovered every day in the healing community. Even though we’ve made the connection between sound and healing for thousands of years, humans have still barely scratched the surface of what audio therapy is capable of with regards to healing the human body. 
While physicians in ancient times knew enough from observational medicine to detect a connection between sound and healing, it wasn’t until mankind developed the technology of the twenty-first century that we began to consistently take measurements of the powerful impact music and sound frequencies can have on our minds and bodies. 
How Is Sound Healing Supposed to Work?  
The way that sound healing works depends on what frequencies are being used and in what vibration or rhythm. On the cellular level, sound healing works by triggering genetic changes. Healing frequencies can even damage the cellular walls of cancerous growths in the case of high-frequency sound therapy cancer treatments. 
On a therapeutic level, exposure to certain sound frequencies has been shown to alter brain and body activities in ways that promote lower stress levels and a higher self-healing immunological response. 
Since lower vibrational frequencies are thought to cause irritation, disease, and other negative effects on the human body, higher frequencies are generally the frequencies used for healing purposes in alternative medicine. 
What Effect Does Low-Frequency Sound Have on Humans?
Not only are low-frequency sounds associated with human illness, but they’re also associated with annoyance, lack of ability to focus or concentrate, and the inability to retain information (memory issues). 
It is believed by some people that some individuals operate at a higher frequency while others operate at a lower frequency, based on unmitigated stress levels or unresolved feelings that the individual inevitably exudes in social interactions with others. This means that one stressed-out person can pass that lower frequency and negative attitude on to anyone else they encounter. 
Coincidentally, many animals communicate displeasure or anxiety with lower frequency communication sounds such as groans, hissing, growls, or snarls. Low-frequency sounds are not only shown to be psychologically distressing to humans—they can create physical fatigue and uncomfortable pressure on the eardrum as well. 
Ambient low-frequency sounds are associated with increased mistakes in the workplace as well as a general sense of discomfort in humans. This is because low sound frequencies conflict with the natural frequencies produced by the human body.  
Here is the full list of negative symptoms associated with low-frequency sound exposure: 
	▪	Loss of sleep
	▪	Irritability
	▪	Fatigue
	▪	Loss of concentration
	▪	Nausea
The government took the application of low-frequency sound as a weapon even further, incorporating infrasonic sound technology into crowd dispersal vehicles such as LRAD tanks. These sonic tanks produce a low-frequency sound designed to induce immediate nausea and dizziness in a rioting crowd through sonic warfare. 
If the healing capability of high-frequency sounds is in question in the medical and holistic communities, there can be no question of the sickening capability of low-frequency sounds when incorporated into acoustic weapons.  
Can Sound Heal the Body?
If low-frequency sounds can sicken the body, it stands to reason that high-frequency sounds can heal it, and science is discovering more and more that this is the case. Centuries’ worth of holistic medicine is being discovered, tested, and verified through scientific study. 
The answer is that yes, sound has been used to heal the body in a variety of different applications. From shamanic drumming used to positively channel altered states of consciousness to hypersonic cancer treatments, sound has been proven time and time again to have healing effects on the human body.  This is a sister practice to Energy Healing of which Reiki is a great example.  
While scientific investigation is slowly catching up with centuries of ancient medicine, the renewed popularity of frequency-related therapies such as sound baths and chanting meditation is also renewing scientific interest in proving the objective basis for sound therapy treatments in a wide variety of medical applications. 
Aside from its ability to physically heal the body, sound healing has a strong ability to induce positive psychological impacts in the human mind. From the effects of music therapy on autistic children to the cognitive rewiring associated with frequency therapy, sound has been shown to heal the body in all sorts of ways. 

Click Here For Program Start Date & Costs
Solfeggio Frequencies
The Solfeggio frequencies are a six-tone set of musical tones that date back to ancient times. Most famously, the Solfeggio frequencies are known for their role in the harmonies of the Gregorian chants. When sung in harmony, these sacred tones were thought by the monks to induce specific blessings on those who listened to the music. 
The association between sound and healing was promoted through the monasteries of the Catholic church, but this belief went back much deeper. In ancient Greece, the mathematician and philosopher Pythagoras led a cult that was convinced of the spiritual significance of the mathematical pattern. 
This religious fervor over the patterns present in mathematics eventually spilled over into Christian traditions where the Solfeggio frequencies were given religious significance and played a large role in the development of spiritual music for centuries. 
Solfeggio frequencies had a much greater role in musical development until the 16th century when humanity adopted the twelve-tone equal temperament tuning method to tune musical instruments. Alternative medicine advocates who promote sound healing usually advocate for a return to the Solfeggio scale, which would subtly change the way the human brain reacts to how music is played.
 These are the Solfeggio frequencies and their associated properties: 
	▪	396 Hz: liberation from negative feelings
	▪	417 Hz: transformation and fixing broken situations
	▪	528 Hz: miracles and DNA repair
	▪	639 Hz: interpersonal relationships
	▪	741 Hz: solving problems, solutions, creative expression 
	▪	852 Hz: spiritual enlightenment
While it is difficult to find exposure to Solfeggio frequencies in popular music, these frequencies are often used in sound healing therapies and new age music as a means to promote self-healing and spiritual development. 
What Is Special About 528 Hz?
All of the Solfeggio frequencies enjoy popularity in New Age and holistic communities, but there is special attention paid to the 528 Hz tone. So what is so special about 528 Hz? 
Also known as the “Mi” tone, this note has been viewed as sacred going back to medieval times, when it had two known definitions: a supernatural occurrence that can only be ascribed to a divine cause, or a marvelous wonder. 528 Hz is known for its connection to the vibrations and frequencies found in the natural world, such as the vibrations of chlorophyll. 
Gregorian chants, which make liberal use of the 528 Hz frequency, are known to cause DNA to absorb more light than other types of music. According to advocates for 528 Hz healing, this is the frequency with which the Earth itself vibrates. 
Because 528hz frequency is associated with miracles by some people, this frequency is possibly considered the holiest of the Solfeggio frequencies other than 852 Hz.

Click Here For Program Start Date & Costs
What is the Best Frequency for the Human Body?
A normal, healthy body should resonate with a natural frequency of 65 – 75M Hz. While it might be surreal to think about, that means humans generate electromagnetic energy or “noise” even as we’re just standing in place. 
When exposed to higher frequencies, such as those found in frequency healing, the human body is stimulated to heal itself. On the flip side of that, if the human body is exposed to constant low-frequency noises, they can develop negative symptoms as a result. 
While it is easiest for a body to maintain homeostasis around frequencies that mimic its normal frequency range of 65-75 Mhz, higher frequency exposure in the form of sound therapy can help eliminate negative thought processes and retrain neural circuits.
Ways Sound Frequency Healing Can Improve Your Health
Incorporating frequency healing into your self-care routine can improve your daily life in a wide variety of ways. Here are some of the ways sound frequency healing can benefit your health: 
	▪	Reduction of stress: Listening to higher frequency audio tapes can fill the listener with a calming peace and reduce feelings of built-up frustration or stress. Stress reduction associated with sound healing is amplified when used in conjunction with sitting meditation and other mindfulness exercises.
	▪	Reduction of pain: Because actively listening to music can lower your perception of pain, sound healing therapies can lessen a patient’s dependence on painkillers and other medications for the reduction of pain. Some frequencies are also thought to actively combat pain in suffering people and promote the healing of injuries.
	▪	Spiritual development: Many frequencies of sound are associated with enlightenment and the activation of parts of the brain associated with spirituality. These frequencies can be used together alongside other rituals to develop a deeper overall spiritual practice.
	▪	Promote healthy relationships: Several frequencies in sound healing are specifically designed to promote feelings of well-being and goodwill towards others, making them an effective form of therapy for those who are feeling frustrated with other people or emotional withdrawal from them.
	▪	Emotional catharsis: Listening to powerful music as a form of sound therapy can stimulate strong emotional responses, which can then create positive changes in body chemistry. For people who otherwise have a difficult time tapping into their emotional reservoirs, music therapy can help dissolve those emotional blockages. 
	▪	Better sleep: Many forms of sound therapy are used for those who are trying to get a good night’s sleep, especially in environments that contain a lot of low-frequency ambient noise that can create auditory distress. High-frequency white noise can provide a soothing background frequency to block lower frequency noises and promote sound sleeping patterns and better sleep hygiene.
	▪	Promote spiritual awareness: Starting up a practice of sound therapy doesn’t just offer the momentary benefits of listening to the sounds—the act of sound therapy itself makes the listener more aware of their spiritual well-being and promotes the adoption of other spiritual practices. This can lead to an overall increase in happiness and spiritual awareness.
	▪	Freedom from headaches: Music therapy has been shown to help alleviate the symptoms of chronic headaches in those who suffer them. Not only does music therapy help people to have better control over their pain management in response to a migraine, but it also caused them to have fewer migraines throughout the course of a month.  
Even if you’re a person who adheres to traditional Western medical practices, there is no harm in adding a frequency healing regimen to your current meditation practices to see if you notice any tangible effects on your psychological and physical well-being. Who knows? You might come across a form of therapy that positively impacts the rest of your life. 
Sound Healing is an Evolving Art
While it is just now starting to get scientific credibility, at least with regards to some aspects of the impacts of sound and frequency on the human body and mind, the concept of sound healing has been around for generations of human society. 
From Gregorian chant to music therapy for psychiatric patients, the healing properties of sound, music, and frequencies will continue to play a large part in the human healing process for centuries to come. 
Chakra and sound healing are two of the most popular alternative healing methods sought by us. In this guide, you’ll learn how chakra frequencies and solfeggio frequencies are connected.
By distinguishing and correlating these two practices, you will gain a good grasp of how you can use them to improve your spirituality.
Let’s first understand the basic context and implications of Solfeggio and chakra frequencies. Ready?
What Are Chakra Frequencies?
If you aren’t familiar with chakra healing, here’s a quick introduction.
Chakra healing involves the act of unlocking one’s chakra points in order to restore balance in the internal flow of energies.
With each chakra point being assigned to a particular area of our life, realizing their importance means that you’ll be able to achieve balance from within.  
Each of the seven Chakra points represents specific values. Here’s a list of them:
	1.	Root Chakra – is responsible for our desire for basic needs such as food, sex, and shelter.
	2.	Sacral Chakra – is responsible for our creativity and procreative powers. 
	3.	Solar Plexus Chakra – is responsible for our inner will and courage.
	4.	Heart Chakra – is responsible for our relationships and connections with others. 
	5.	Throat Chakra – is responsible for our delivery and communication of negative and positive thoughts. 
	6.	Third-Eye Chakra – is responsible for our thoughts, perspectives, and intuitions. 
	7.	Crown Chakra – is responsible for our spiritual self. 
By making sure that these chakra points aren’t blocked, you are allowing yourself the benefit of yielding the universal energy that surrounds us. 
What Are Solfeggio Frequencies?
As the most popular form of sound healing, Solfeggio frequencies rely on basic notes to emit a particular hertz.
Each of these hertz having a specific meaning and intention, with the overarching purpose of creating sound healing.
That said, here’s a quick list of the Solfeggio frequencies and each of their intentions: 
396 Hz – Generally, for liberating one’s fear and guilt, this Solfeggio frequency addresses our innermost problems.
417 Hz – As we seek positive change and progress, this frequency facilitates such transition. 
528 Hz – Given how modern medicine has its limitations, this frequency seeks miracle healing through DNA alterations.
639 Hz – As social beings, we seek to connect and reconnect with others, and is thus facilitated by this Solfeggio frequency. 
741 Hz – Seeking one’s own answers, this frequency helps us express and solve things. 
852 Hz – Unlocking one’s unlimited potential, we become closer to our spiritual self through this Solfeggio frequency. 
Sound meditation gurus use tuning forks to emit these frequencies, giving their meditators a sound bath. A sound bath leads you to a unique sense of fulfillment and spiritual liberation. 
Combining Chakra Frequencies and Solfeggio Frequencies
Chakra frequencies and Solfeggio frequencies might seem like entirely different new age spirituality practices.
But because of the eclectic approach in the new age, practitioners and believers have sought ways to correlate both. 
Originally, charka healing was practiced together with a set of chants and meditations.
By doing such chants together with proper postures and meditation techniques, you’ll be able to unblock the troubled areas of your life. 

As these practices evolve, people began incorporating the concept of Solfeggio Frequencies.
As such, they’ve come to assign certain frequencies with the specific chakra points that we know of.
For instance, one of the more popular interpretations is this: 
Root Chakra Frequency: 396 Hz
Reflecting on the vibrational tone of the earth, this frequency resonates with our desire to liberate ourselves from fear and guilt that hinders us from pursuing our basic needs.  
Sacral Chakra Frequency: 417 Hz
Reflecting the tone of the lunar month, this strongly correlates with our desire for change and progress, something that requires much creativity.  
Solar Plexus Chakra Frequency: 528 Hz
Reflecting the tone of the sun, transformation and miracles happen as long as we have the willpower to move mountains.  
Heart Chakra Frequency: 639 Hz
Reflecting the tone of the Earth’s year, this frequency helps us connect relationships, which is basically the main function of the heart charka.  
Throat Chakra Frequency: 741 Hz
Reflecting the tone of the planet Mercury, it is known to awaken one’s intuition leading to better communication with others.  
Third-Eye Chakra Frequency: 852 Hz
Reflecting the tone of the planet Venus, this allows us to return to our spiritual order which unlocks the unconscious elements of the mind.  
Crown Chakra Frequency: 963 HZ
Reflecting the tone of the Platonic year, this correlates with the higher self of the crown chakra. 
Final Word About Chakra Frequencies
By combining sound meditation together with chakra frequencies and Solfeggio frequencies, you will be able to achieve a different kind of unblocking or regulation of your chakra points.
As these frequencies become amplifiers, they will definitely help you in your chakra meditation. 
With that, the key lies in being able to know how to integrate all these techniques altogether and experience a completely different level of sound healing.
The Magic of Crystals and Gemstones
		

Crystals and gemstones are like people, each one is unique and exudes a specific energy, a crystal or gemstone may be used for healing, magic, spell casting, to inspire, uplift, balance, calm and energise. Stone can enhance learning, alleviate stress, balance the energy fields in your home, activate your energy and promote lucid dreaming. Crystal energy can assist you in any area of your life and for any reason, each crystal or gem has a multitude of uses, and it will choose you, not the other way around. When purchasing a crystal or gemstone there will always be one that stands out from the rest, you will be attracted to the stone and be compelled to take it home with you. The crystal or gemstone that comes to you will be the one you need at that particular moment in your life.
Movement in the Earth’s crust is the catalyst for the formation of a crystal, as superheated liquids and gases, filled with different elements, move rapidly towards the surface. As the liquids and 

gases cool they crystallize, the temperature, pressure, surrounding rocks and other elements determine which minerals crystallize at a particular pace, crystals and rocks produced in this way are known as igneous. When crystals and rocks are exposed to the elements, they begin to erode and small particles are washed into the sea forming silt deposits. After extreme pressure for millions of years, these deposits become compressed, forming sedimentary crystals and rock.
Many ancient cultures believed that stones contained a life force and used them to conduct rituals and for healing. It is believed that the lost city of Atlantis used crystal power extensively. Stones have also played an integral role in various religions. The most ancient jewellery was found in Queen Pu-Abi’s tomb at Ur in Sumeria, dating back to the third millennium BC. Ancient priests believed crystals to be a force that defied all evil. The Egyptians engraved an eye of lapis lazuli, symbolising Ra the sun god, and to the Cherokee Indians crystal is a sacred stone used for healing.
It is not necessary for a person to possess special abilities to work with crystals and gems, all you need is the intention and the desire to perform a particular type of magic to enhance your life, the work is done with the energy of the crystal or gem, and you are the conduit. Seen as a connecting force between earth and ether, crystals are used for crystal ball readings, scrying, spell casting and invoking.
Cleansing your Crystals – To cleanse your crystals they can be placed in a warm water bath with detergent added, use a soft toothbrush to clean well, then place your crystals in cold water and leave for at least one hour. After removing your crystals from the water place them outside in the sun, or inside near a window where they will receive the sun’s rays. If the day is cloudy place them inside near a window and let them dry naturally. When night falls place the crystals outside, allowing them to absorb the moon’s rays, or inside near a window where they can be charged by the light of the moon.
Becoming Attuned – You can attune to the energy of a crystal or gem, by touch, and moving the stone from hand to hand while you concentrate on the particular qualities of the individual stone. After a few minutes you will become aware of a pulsing or tingling in your hands. This is a signal of your conscious awareness of crystal energy, and a bonding between you and your crystal.
Energy and Intention – Each crystal has a pre-programmed energy for you to work with, and if you state your intention before working with a particular crystal, it will then resonate with energy and amplify the energy. While holding the crystal in both hands, breathe deeply in through the nose and out through the mouth and into the crystal, do this for approximately 3 minutes. By doing this you are connecting your intention with the inherent qualities of the crystal and activating the life energy within the crystal.
There are a multitude of ways to use your stones, such as placing an amethyst under your pillow for a comfortable dreamed filled sleep, you may like to carry a small crystal or gem in your bag or pocket. Place crystals around your plants to aid growth, or put one next to your computer to diffuse the electromagnetic energy. Keep one on your desk when you are working to inspire you, use a gem or crystal to help you organise scattered thoughts and to help you think more clearly. If you are feeling a little run down, wear one as an amulet to repel dense energies and protect your psyche. Place a crystal in each area of your home to create harmony.
Meditating – When meditating with a crystal, work with the same one each time, it will attune to you and the way you work, by doing this you will be able to reach a deep meditative state very quickly. A crystal is used to amplify thought, will, and intention, and once a connection is made everything is enhanced. Crystal healing is dependent on a quiet mind and meditation is an integral part. To achieve the best results it is important to still and clear your mind before you begin, an empty mind is essential for healing.
Healing – Healing with crystals and gems is an ancient practice embraced by many cultures, there are no specific rules to abide by, trust your intuition and work in a way that you are comfortable with. Over time a style is developed that suits the individual, with each healer working in their own way and embracing their particular quirk factor. When you are healing, an appropriate crystal may be placed on a particular area of the body that is afflicted. Crystal and gemstone healing is not meant to replace traditional treatment, nor is it a cure for all that ails, it should be used as a complementary therapy. The more you work with crystals the more attuned you will become to their subtle energies. When healing with a crystal you may want to choose a crystal wand, this will have one rounded end and one pointed end, a crystal wand can be used to recharge your entire body. The crystal can be held and pointed at the area of the body that is in need of healing, you then visualise a stream of white light emanating from the tip and flowing into the body. Crystal healing clears blockages and brings everything into balance.
Keep a crystal and gemstone journal, write down everything you do, the type of crystal or gem and its properties, how you used it and how you felt afterwards. When you used it and what the results were, also take note if you find that one crystal works better than another, document your first impressions or images associated with each crystal. If you keep a Book of Shadows, your crystal and gemstone journal can become part of it.
 
AGATE – Inspires competition and eloquence (perfect if you have something to say). For Mouth – fever – circulation.
AGATE BLUELACE – Composure, calm, balance. Inflammation – fever.
AGATE BOTSWANA – Understanding. Recuperation – infection.
AGATE DENDRITIC – Balance, energy, steadiness. Recuperation.
AGATE MOSS – Assertiveness, renewal. Heart – lungs.
AGATE TREE – Organisation, management. Chest – stomach.
ALEXANDRITE – Investment, growth. Nerves.
ALMANDINE – Inspiration, tolerance, affection. Eyes – heart.
AMAZONITE – Self-expression, insight, stabilises emotions, promotes growth, study, clarity, insight, success. Nerves.
AMBER – Helps career, relieves stress, accomplishments, uplifts. Depression – chest.
AMETHYST – Aids sleep, reduces electrical energies, creates calm and tranquility, inspires happiness, generates positive feelings, relieves stress. Addictions – acne.
AMETRINE – Resolution, teaching. Metabolism – mouth.
ANDALUSITE – Moderation, enlightenment. Memory – vision.
ANGELITE – Bravery, abundance, communication, overcoming challenges, balance. Infection – headache.
ANHYDRITE – Co-ordination, concentration. Lungs.
ANTIMOANY – Intellect, progress. Cold – flu.
APATITE –  Calms, helps business, will help you speak up if need be. Bones.
APOPHYLLITE – Tranquillity, honesty. Respiration.
AQUA AURA – Dexterity, the arts. Throat – healing.
AQUAMARINE – Insight, love, growth, calms nerves, brings peace, promotes truth. Stills the mind.
ARAGONITE – To energise. Allergies – nerves.
ASTROPHYLLITE – Confidence, insight, the intellect. Reproductive organs.
AUGELITE – Contemplation, justice. Digestion – muscles.
AVENTURINE – Judgement, relieves tension, prosperity, clears the mind. Eyes – migraine.
AZURITE – Meditation, concentration, spirituality. Liver.
BARITE – Writing, decisions. Muscles.
BERYL – Determination, stability, calms, reduces stress. Very effective when used for love spells. Nerves – physical strength.
BLOODSTONE – Temperance, kindness, courage, wealth, confidence. Bloodstream – circulation.
BLUE JOHN – Renewal, strength. General health.
BLUE CORAL – Balance, protection from negativity. Worry.
BOWENITE – Intelligence. Head – scalp – tension.
BRAZILLIANITE – A social crystal, enhances relationships. Nerves – skin.
CALCITE – Comfort, inspiration, calm, balance. Bladder.
CARNELIAN – Passion, sensuality, sexual energy. Rheumatism – arthritis.
CASSITERITE – Endurance, contentment. Cuts – bruises.
CATS EYE – Inner vision, security. Headaches.
CELESTITE – Calm, relaxation, meditation, eases worries. Nerves – stress – travel sickness.
CERRUSITE – Confidence, nerves, insomnia. calm. Nerves – antivirus.
CHALCEDONY – Stamina, energises, awakens, stimulates the mind and removes negativity. Depression – circulation – low energy.
CHALCOPYRIE – Perception, intuition. Lungs – hair.
CHAROITE – Assertiveness, inspiration. Cramps.
CHIASTOLITE – Stability. Veins – rheumatism.
CHRYSOCOLLA – Self awareness, self-expression. Heart – blood.
CHRYSOPRASE – Passion, beginnings, sensuality, friendship, prosperity, good luck, physical love. Fertility healing.
CHRYSOTILE – Partnerships, generosity. Arteries – veins – lungs.
CINNABAR – Independence, stability. Heart – appetite.
CITRINE – Calm, uplift, dreams, psychic ability, intuition. Circulation – diabetes – anxiety.
COLEMANITE – Loyalty. Lungs – muscles.
CORUNDUM – Awareness, confidence. Eyes – skin.
COVELLITE – Communication. Mouth – ears – nose.
CROCOITE – Action, industry. Sex organs.
CRUPITE – Awareness, teaching. Bladder – circulation – stomach.
DANBURITE – Social grace, dignity, confidence. Muscles.
DESERT ROSE – Perception, intuition. Stress – recuperation.
DIAMOND – Abundance, prosperity, courage, business, strength. Health and wellbeing.
DIOPSIDE – Love, lovers, partnership, commitment. Circulation – lungs – heart.
DIOPTASE – Meditation, partnerships. Headache – stress.
DOLOMITE – Optimism, hope, belief. Limbs.
DUMORTIERITE – Patience, calm. Skin – nausea.
EILAT STONE – Spirituality, meditation, balance. Wellbeing.
EMERALD – Prosperity, intellect, truth, psychic ability. Helps the truth to surface. Headaches – infection – thyroid – tension.
EUDIALITE – Management, overcoming. Sex organs – recovery.
FLUORITE – A stone that harnesses spiritual awareness, meditation and grounding. Inflammation – bones – healing.
FRANKLINIITE – Imagination. Eyes – hair.
FUCHSITE – Teamwork, productivity. Arteries.
GALENA – Dedication. Insomnia.
GARNET – Creativity, charm, charisma, used as an amulet by travellers, attract love. Infection – anaemia – insomnia.
GEODE – Growth, psychic ability, inspired dreams. Fertility.
GOETHITE – Perseverance competition. Nerves.
GOLDSTONE – Optimism. Stomach – tension.
GRANITE – Balance, stability, determination. Skin – hearing.
GRAPHITE – Assert, achieve. Spine – hearing.
HEMATITE – Calm, serenity. Blood – tiredness – stress – eyes.
HERKIMER DIAMOND – Opens the mind, enhances dreams, learning, study, it can be used to enhance the power of other stones. Stamina – energy.
HICKORYITE – Adventure, imagination, removes negativity, creativity. Boredom – feeling down.
HORNBLENDE – Wisdom, insight, communication, balance. Fingers – toes.
HOWLITE – Resilience, competition. Bones.
IOLITE – Control, management. Chest – addiction.
IRNAMITE – Calm, rational, judgement, emotional balance, inspiration. Muscles – strains.
JADE – To calm the mind, longevity, benevolence, providence, to attract friendship and as a travel talisman. Bladder – kidneys
JASPER – To attract what you desire. Nerves – blood.
JET – Dispels negativity, empathy. Migraine – healing.
KUNZITE – Balance, stability, communication. Heart – skin.
KYANITE – Energy, strength, finance. Hearing.
LABRADORITE – Charisma, to improve relationships, quells inhibitions, releases hidden qualities. Feet.
LAPIS LAZULI – Spirituality, mysticism, protection, wisdom, truth, integrity, abundance, wealth creation. Heart – bones – eyes.
LARIMAR – Rapport, meditation. Breathing – neck.
LAVAKITE – Intellect, learning, adaptability, achievement. Brain.
LAZULITE – Serenity. Teeth.
LEPIDOLITE – Recharge, balance, peace. Nerves – pessimism.
LEUCITE – Clear thinking, protection. Nerves.
LODESTONE – Communication, teamwork. Glands – circulation.
MAGNETITE – Composure, learning. Heart.
MAGNESITE – Enlightenment, emotional balance. Bones – fever.
MALACHITE – Business prosperity, optimism, plant growth, spells. Rheumatism – recovery – asthma.
MARBLE – Renewal, compassion. Fever.
MARCASITE – Ambition, rapport. Brain – circulation.
METEORITE – Intuition, benevolence, communication, adventure. Spiritual guidance.
MOLDOVITE – Insight, sensitivity. Fertility – renewal.
MOOKAITE – Responsibility. Health.
MOONSTONE – A feminine stone associated with the Goddess Diana, attracts lovers and ensures safe travel, it enhances beauty and devotion. Swelling.
MORGANITE – Intellect, commerce. Hearing.
MOSS AGATE – Self-awareness, meditation. Glands – lungs.
MTOROLITE – Serenity, capability. Nerves.
MUSCOVITE – Inspiration, energy. Speech – muscles.
OBSIDIAN – Brings matters to the surface, dispels negativity, creates tranquility. Digestion – stomach – stress.
ONYX – Spiritual alignment, harmony, peace of mind, tranquility. A protection amulet. Heart – hearing – stomach.
OPAL – Attracting, creativity, prosperity, luck, power, abundance. Chest.
OPALITE – Invention. Tiredness.
PEACOCK ORE (Bonita) – Mind stimulant, can be used as a charm. Brain – eyes.
PEARL – Creativity, certainty. Headaches, Tension.
PERIDOT – Intuition, career, wealth, abundance, protection. Metabolism.
PHENACITE – Intellect, Insight. Limbs – stomach.
PIETERSITE – Organisation, objectivity. Sleep – respiration.
PREHNITE – Insight, intellect. Stomach.
PURPURITE – Prosperity, leadership. Wounds.
PYRITES – Truth, awareness. Recuperation.
QUARTZ CLEAR – Generally used for healing purposes, to cleanse mind, body, spirit. Vertigo.
QUARTZ ROSE – The love crystal associated with Venus, joy, happiness, peace, harmony often used in love spells. Migraine – headaches.
QUARTZ RUTILATED – Passion. Anxiety.
QUARTZ SMOKEY – Use in spells to remove negative energies, or as a lucky talisman. Spine – depression – stomach.
QUARTZ SNOW – Relaxation, meditation, serenity. Nerves – stress.
RHODOCHROSITE – Comfort, stillness, friendship, love, balance, stability. Insecurity – Eyes.
RHODONITE – Communication. Hearing – memory loss – recuperation.
RHODOLITE – Stability. Glands.
RHYOLITE – Marketing, stability. Skin.
RUBELLITE – Prosperity. Heart – back – recovery.
RUBY – Luck, fortune, contentment. Circulation.
SAPPHIRE – Love, partnership, protection, power, inspiration. Depression.
SARDONYX – Forgiveness. Neck – hearing.
SATINSPAR – Insight, calms disputes. Spine.
SCAPOLITE –  Strength, achievement. Veins.
SCHALENBLENDE – Attract, abundance. Eyes – muscles.
SCHEELITE – Awareness, balances relationships. Colds – flu.
SCHORL – Balance, practicality. Intestines – liver.
SEFTONITE – Enhances relationships, learning. Circulation.
SERPENTINE – Meditation, enlightenment. Stomach.
SIDERITE – Loyalty, intellect. Hands – bones.
SILICONE – Attract, draw to you. Muscles.
SILVER – Perception. Recovery.
SMITHSONITE – Harmony, consideration. Digestion.
SOAPSTONE – Loyalty. Back.
SODALITE – Confidence, self-assertion, meditation. Chest – insomnia – blood pressure.
SPESSARTINE – Renewal, confidence.
SPHALERITE – Integrity, career. Calms nerves.
SPINEL – Intellect, energy. Depression – skin – stress.
SPIRIT STONES – Vitality, awareness. Cleansing.
STAUROLITE – Brings all elements together, integration, focus, awareness. Body – spine – memory loss.
STEATITE – Adventure, communication. Digestion.
STICHTITE – Loyalty, creativity. Chest – muscles – joints.
STILBITE – Creativity, understanding. Toxins.
SUGILITE – Co-operation, co-ordination, inspiration, peace of mind, psychic awareness. Healing – inflammation – pain.
SULPHUR – Protection and intellect. Arthritis – rheumatism – skin
SUNSTONE – Insight, regeneration, can be used in spells associated with sexuality. Depression – eyes.
TANZANITE – Vitality, movement. Bones – anxiety.
THULITE – Aligns mind and body, meditation, concentration. Hands – tendons.
TIGER IRON – Endurance, vigour, clarity. Physical strength – energy.
TIGERS EYE – Insight, Integrity, overcoming. Limbs – asthma.
TOPAZ – Legal matters. Infection – digestion.
TOURMALINE – Confidence, success, abundance, luck. Healing.
TURQUENTINE – Travel. Limbs.
TURQUOISE – Protects the home, aligns friendships, comfort, tranquility. Throat – respiration – recovery – chakra healing.
ULEXITE – Contentment. Teeth – worry.
UNAKITE – Strength, stability, enhancement. Back – feet – muscles.
UVAROVITE – Joy, vitality. Throat – voice.
VANADINITE – Friendships, socialising. Lungs.
VARISCITE – Writing, meditation. Digestion.
VERDITE – Friendship, partnership. Nervous system.
VESUVIANITE – Intuition, partnership. Depression.
VIOLAN – Vitality, Insight. Genitals.
WILLIAMSITE – Truth, tranquility. Inflammation – lungs – chest.
WOLLASTONITE – Meditation, grounding energy, moderation. Glands – bones.
WULFENITE – Relationship balance and harmony. Digestive system.
ZEOLITE – Clear thinking, independence. Toxins – addictions.
ZINC – Loyalty, joy. Bones – muscles – back.
ZIRCON – Clarity, rest, sleep. Genitals – PMS.
ZOISITE – Attraction. Fertility – fingers – joints.
Everything is made up of electromagnetic energy vibrating at different frequencies that correspond to sound, light and color. We are drawn to the colors needed to create balance in our lives, the goal in all healing. Our consciousness and emotions align with the colors we wear, home design, and often our diet. Some people dream in color, others in black and white. ROYGBIV is an acronym for the sequence of hues commonly described as making up a rainbow.
 
Colors and Frequencies
 
Blue

Blue is a color, the perception of which is evoked by light having a spectrum dominated by energy with a wavelength of roughly 440-490 nm. It is considered one of the additive primary colors.
On the HSV Color Wheel, the complement of blue is yellow; that is, a color corresponding to an equal mixture of red and green light. On a color wheel based on traditional color theory (RYB), the complementary color to blue is considered to be orange (based on the Munsell color wheel).
The English language commonly uses "blue" to refer to any color from navy blue to cyan. The word itself is derived from the Old French word bleu.
A Scots and Scottish English word for "blue-grey" is blae, from the Middle English bla ("dark blue," from the Old English blood). Ancient Greek lacked a word for color blue and Homer called the color of the sea "wine dark", except that the word kyanos (cyan) was used for dark blue enamel.
In the English language, blue may refer to the feeling of sadness. This is because blue was related to rain, or storms, and in Greek mythology, the god Zeus would make rain when he was sad (crying), and a storm when he was angry. Kyanos was a name used in Ancient Greek to refer to dark blue tile (in English it means blue-green or cyan). The phrase "feeling blue" is linked also to a custom among many old deepwater sailing ships. If the ship lost the captain or any of the officers during its voyage, she would fly blue flags and have a blue band painted along her entire hull when returning to home port.
Many languages do not have separate terms for blue and or green, instead using a cover term for both (when the issue is discussed in linguistics, this cover term is sometimes called grue in English). Blue is commonly used on internet browsers to color a link that has not been clicked; when a link has been clicked it changes yellow or orange or purple.
 
Metaphysics
Blue is the color of truth, serenity and harmony, by helping to soothe the mind. It is good for cooling, calming, reconstructing and protecting. good for fevers, calming the body and mind, raising frequency, etc.
Blue is the color of electricity. We experience in a program created by electromagnetic energy that had a beginning and is evolving out of physical consciousness.
Blue connects with the third eye chakra.
Blue Crystals
Blue relates to the future in linear time as it is a faster moving frequency than we experience in the physical. Consciousness is moving into the blue. (Midnight) Blue takes us to 12:00, 12 around 1 creational geometry, 2012 Mayan Calendar Prophecy, Hopi Blue Kachina Prophecies, Isis/Sirius, and more.
Indigo Children
 
Blue In the News ...
 Experts discover traces of rare artificial pigment on Egyptian mummy portraits and panel paintings   Ancient Origins - August 29, 2015  Egyptian Blue is one of the first artificial pigments known to have been used by man. First created around 5,000 years ago by heating a mixture of a calcium compound, a copper-containing compound, silica sand and soda or potash to around 850-950 C, the precious pigment was reserved for the most exquisite of artworks. In Egyptian belief, blue was considered the color of the heavens, and hence the universe. It was also associated with water and the Nile. However, scientists have now found traces of the rare pigment behind drab-colored mummy portraits, leading to a new understanding of how this particular pigment was used by artists in the second century A.D.
 Egyptian Blue Hides in These Mummy Portraits   Epoch Times - August 29, 2015  Dusting off 15 Roman-era Egyptian mummy portraits - mostly untouched for 100 years - has revealed a 2,000-year-old surprise. Researchers discovered that the ancient artists used the pigment Egyptian blue as material for underdrawings and for modulating color -a finding never documented before. Because blue has to be manufactured, it typically is reserved for very prominent uses, not hidden under other colors. We see how these artists manipulated a small palette of pigments, including this unusual use of Egyptian blue, to create a much broader spectrum of hues.

Red

Red is any of a number of similar colors evoked by light consisting predominantly of the longest wavelengths of light discernible by the human eye, in the wavelength range of roughly 625-740 nm. Longer wavelengths than this are called infrared, or below red and cannot be seen by the naked human eye. Red is used as one of the additive primary colors of light, complementary to cyan, in RGB color systems. Red is also one of the subtractive primary colors of RYB color space but not CMYK color space.
In human color psychology, red is associated with heat, energy and blood, and emotions that "stir the blood", including anger, passion, and love.
Red is any of a number of similar colors evoked by light consisting predominantly of the longest wavelengths of light discernible by the human eye, in the wavelength range of roughly 630-700 nm. Longer wavelengths than this are called infrared, or below red and cannot be seen by human eyes.
Red's wavelength has been an important factor in laser technologies as red lasers, used in early compact disc technologies, are being replaced by blue lasers, as red's longer wavelength causes the laser's recordings to take up more space on the disc than blue lasers. Red light is also used to preserve night vision in low-light or night-time situations, as the rod cells in the human eye aren't sensitive to red. Red is used as one of the additive primary colors of light, complementary to cyan, in RGB color systems. Red is also one of the subtractive primary colors of RYB color space but not CMYK color space.
One common use of red as an additive primary color is in the RGB color model. Because "red" is not by itself standardized, color mixtures based on red are not exact specifications of color either. In order to produce exact colors the color red needs to be defined in terms of an absolute color space such as sRGB. As used in computer monitors and television screens, red is very variable, but some systems may apply color correction (so that a standardized "red" is produced that is not in fact full intensity of only the red colorant).
A red filter used in black and white photography increases contrast in most scenes. For example, combined with a polarizer, it can turn the sky black. Films simulating the effects of infrared film (such as Ilford's SFX 200) do so by being much more sensitive to red than to other colors. Red illumination was (and sometimes still is) used as a "safelight" while working in a darkroom, as it does not expose most photographic paper and some films. Though many more modern darkrooms use an amber safelight, red illumination is closely associated with the darkroom in the public mind.

Etymology and Definitions
The word red comes from the Old English read. Further back, the word can be traced to the Proto-Germanic rauthaz and the Proto-Indo European root reudh-.
This is the only color word which has been traced to an Indo-European root.
In Sanskrit, the word rudra means red. In the English language, the word red is associated with the color of blood, certain flowers (i.e. roses), and ripe fruits (i.e. apples, cherries). Fire is also strongly connected, as is the sun and the sky at sunset.
Healthy people are often said to have a redness to their skin color (as opposed to be appearing pale). After the rise of socialism in the mid-19th century, red was to describe revolutionary movements. The word is also obviously associated with anything of the color occupying the lower end of the visible light spectrum, such as red hair or red soil.
Red Indians is a British term for Native Americans, American terms for this ethnic group include redskin, redhead and red man, though they are not the preferred terms.

In Nature
In astronomy, stars of spectral type M (the stars with the coolest temperature) are classified as red stars.
Mars is called the Red Planet because of the reddish color imparted to its surface by the abundant iron oxide present there. Astronomical objects which are moving away from the observer exhibit a red shift.
Jupiter's surface displays a Great Red Spot, a football-shaped area south of the planet's equator. Astronomers believe the spot to be some kind of storm.
Oxygenated blood is red due to the presence of oxygenated hemoglobin.
Red light is the first to be absorbed by sea water, so that many fish and marine invertebrates that appear bright red are black in their native habitat.
When used about animal coloration red usually refers to a brownish, reddish-brown or ginger color. In this sense it is used to describe coat colors of reddish-brown cattle and dogs, and in the names of various animal species or breeds such as red fox, red squirrel, red deer, Robin Redbreast, Red Grouse, Red Knot, Redstart, Redwing, Red Setter, Red Devon cattle etc.
The usage for animal color appears similar to that for red ochre, red hair and Red Indian.
Red appears to be rarely used in names of animals which are a brighter blood-red or scarlet color (Carmine Bee-eater, Scarlet Tanager). When used for flowers, red often refers to purplish (red deadnettle, red clover, red helleborine) or pink (red campion, red valerian) colors.

Symbolism
Aggression, anger, blood, blushing, stop, Communism, courage, danger, guilt, energy, fire, hate, hell, honor, leadership, passion, socialism, sacrifice, sex, sin, violence, negativity, warning.
A biblical example is found in Isaiah: "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow." Also, The Scarlet Letter an 1850 American novel by Nathaniel Hawthorne, features a woman in a Puritan New England community who is punished for adultery with ostracism, her sin represented by a red letter 'A' sewn into her clothes. This all comes from a general Hebrew view inherited by Christianity which associates red with the blood of murder, as well as with guilt in general.
Another popular example of this is in the phrase "caught red-handed", meaning either caught in an act of crime or caught with the blood of murder still on one's hands. At one point, red was associated with prostitutes, or now, with brothels (red-light districts).
In Roman Catholicism, red represents wrath, one of the Seven Deadly Sins. In Christianity, Satan is usually depicted as colored red and/or wearing a red costume in both iconography and popular culture. Statistics have shown that red cars are more likely to be involved in accidents.
The color red is associated with lust, passion, love, and beauty as well. The association with love and beauty is possibly related to the use of red roses as a love symbol. Both the Greeks and the Hebrews considered red a symbol of love, as well as sacrifice. Psychological research has shown that men find women who are wearing red more attractive.

Courage and Sacrifice
Red is also used as a symbol of courage and sacrifice, as in blood spilt in sacrifice or courage in the face of lethal danger. Examples of this are found in the flags of many nations including the United States, as well as in the novel The Red Badge of Courage, in which a soldier in the American Civil War discovers the meaning of courage.
Besides the association with guilt previously mentioned, in Christianity, red represents the color of Christian martyrs who suffered death for their faith. It is sometimes used for Holy Thursday and during Eastertide, and red green and white is the color scheme of Christmas. In Roman Catholic tradition it is used for all feast days of Christian martyrs as well as Palm Sunday in anticipation of the death of Jesus.
Along the same lines, red is associated in Roman mythology with the god of war, Mars. A Roman general receiving a triumph had his entire body painted red in honor of his achievement.The phrase "red-blooded" describes someone who is audacious, robust, or virile.
In English heraldry, red (called gules) denoted ardent affection or love, while crimson (blood-color) stood for boldness, enthusiasm, or impetuosity.
Warning
Red catches people's attention, and is often used either in a negative way to indicate danger and emergency, or in a positive way in advertising to gain more viewers, or in nature, as a ripe fruit announces its readiness with its red color. Several studies have indicated that red carries the strongest reaction of all the colors, with the level of reaction decreasing gradually with orange, yellow, and white, respectively. Because of this, scientists have repeatedly recommended red for warning signals, labels, and signs. Because of these recommendations, red has seen widespread use as a danger signal, in stop signs, to warn people of extreme heat or flammability, and even to signal warnings in sports such as soccer.

In Religion
Red may represent fire and so may symbolize the presence of God.
In Christianity, red is the liturgical color for Pentecost. Also, in the Catholic Church red is the color of a martyr.
In Islam red is the color for sacrificement and courage. Many Islamic states have it as a sign of the courage of Muslims and the sacrifice of their lives for what is good.

In Metaphysics
In metaphysics red connects with the root chakra.
Alice Bailey developed a system called the Seven Rays, where she classified humans into seven different metaphysical psychological types, the "sixth ray" of "love-devotion" is represented by the color red. People who have this metaphysical psychological type are said to be "on the Red Ray".
Psychics who claim to be able to observe the aura with their third eye report that a red aura is associated with a love of sports and physical exercise.
Red Crystals

In Non-Western Traditions
In China, red is the symbol of fire and the south (both south in general and Southern China specifically). It carries a largely positive connotation, being associated with courage, loyalty, honor, success, fortune, fertility, happiness, passion, and summer. In Chinese cultural traditions, red is associated with weddings (where brides traditionally wear red dresses) and red paper is also frequently used to wrap gifts of money or other things. Special red packets called hong bao as in Mandarin or lai see as in Cantonese - are specifically used during the Chinese New Year to give monetary gifts. On the more negative end, obituaries are traditionally written in red ink, and to write someone's name in red signals either cutting them out of your life, or that they have died. Red is also associated with both the feminine yin and the masculine yang, depending on the source. When someone commits suicide, especially a female, and wants to haunt their loved one, they will dress in red from top to bottom before carrying out the act.
In Japan, red is a traditional color for a heroic figure.
In the Indian Sub-continent, red is the traditional color of bridal dresses, and is frequently represented in the media as a symbolic color for married women. The color is associated with sexuality in marriage relationships through its connection to heat and fertility. It is also the color of wealth, beauty, and the goddess Lakshmi.
In Central Africa, Ndembu warriors rub themselves with red during celebrations. Since their culture sees the color as a symbol of life and health, sick people are also painted with it. Like most Central African cultures, the Ndembu see red as ambivalent, better than black, but not as good as white.[39] In other parts of Africa, however, red is a color of mourning, representing death. Because of the connection red bears with death in many parts of Africa, the Red Cross has changed its colors to green and white in parts of the continent.

 

 
Orange

The color orange occurs between red and yellow in the visible spectrum at a wavelength of about 585 - 620 nm, and has a hue of 30 degrees in HSV color space. The complementary color of orange is azure, a slightly greenish blue. Orange pigments are largely in the ochre or cadmium families, and absorb mostly blue light.
The color is named after the orange fruit, introduced to Europe via the Sanskrit word naranja. Before this was introduced to the English-speaking world, the color was referred to (in Old English) as geoluhread, which translates into Modern English as yellow-red. The first recorded use of orange as a color name in English was in 1512, in the court of King Henry VIII.

Metaphysics
In metaphysics orange connects with the spleen chakra.
Orange creates balance. In terms of subtle bodies, it is linked to the mental body in both its logical and conceptual form. It is used to increase immunity, to increase sexual potency, to help in all digestive ailments, chest and kidney diseases. Orange will have a gentle warming effect if used lightly.
Orange Crystals
 

 
Yellow

Yellow is the color evoked by light that stimulates both the L and M (long and medium wavelength) cone cells of the retina about equally, but does not significantly stimulate the S (short-wavelength) cone cells; that is, light with much red and green but not very much blue.
Light with a wavelength of 570-580 nm is yellow, as is light with a suitable mixture of somewhat longer and shorter wavelengths. Yellow's traditional RYB complementary color is purple, violet or indigo. Yellow's colorimetrically defined complementary color in both RGB and CMYK color spaces is blue.
The word yellow comes from the Old English geolu, which derived from the Proto-Germanic word gelwaz. The oldest known usage of this word in English is in the Old English poem Beowulf, in a description of a shield made of wood from a yew tree.
In the English language, yellow is used to describe objects having the color between green and orange in the visible light spectrum (gold, egg yolks, sunflowers, etc.). The color is associated with age and aging, both with people and objects (e.g. yellowed-paper). Ethnographically, the term yellow has also been used as a slang term for both oriental persons and light-skinned African-Americans. The term is associated at times with jealousy, as well as cowardliness. Lastly, it is associated with sensational journalistic practices, or yellow journalism, and resistance to militant trade unions.

Metaphysics
In metaphysics orange connects with the solar plexus.
Yellow is the color of intellect and it is used for mental clarity. Linked to the sun and the lion, yellow is connected to the source of creation as its frequency emerges into white light and consciousness.
Yellow Crystals
 

 
Green

Green is a color, the perception of which is evoked by light having a spectrum dominated by energy with a wavelength of roughly 520-570-nm. In the subtractive color system, it is not a primary color, but is created out of a mixture of yellow and blue, or yellow and cyan; it is considered one of the additive primary colors. On the HSV color wheel, the complement of green is magenta; that is, a purple color corresponding to an equal mixture of red and blue light. On a color wheel based on traditional color theory (RYB), the complementary color to green is considered to be red.
The word green is closely related to the Old English verb growan, 'to grow'. It is used to describe plants or the ocean. Sometimes it can also describe someone who is inexperienced, jealous, or sick. In America, green is a slang term for money, among other things. Several colloquialisms have derived from these meanings, such as 'green around the gills', a phrase used to describe a person who looks ill.
Several minerals have a green color, including the emerald, which is colored green by its chromium content. Animals such as frogs, lizards, and other reptiles and amphibians, fish, insects, and birds, appear green because of a mixture of layers of blue and green coloring on their skin. By far the largest contributor to green in nature is chlorophyll, the chemical by which plants photosynthesize. Many creatures have adapted to their green environments by taking on a green hue themselves as camouflage.
Culturally, green has broad and sometimes contradictory meanings. In some cultures, green symbolizes hope and growth, while in others, it is associated with death, sickness, envy or the devil.
The most common associations, however, are found in its ties to nature. For example, Islam venerates the color, as it expects paradise to be full of lush greenery. Green is also associated with regeneration, fertility and rebirth for its connections to nature. Recent political groups have taken on the color as symbol of environmental protection and social justice, and consider themselves part of the Green movement, some naming themselves Green parties. This has led to similar campaigns in advertising, as companies have sold green, or environmentally friendly, products.
The word green comes from the Old English word grene, or, in its older form, groeni. This adjective is closely related to the Old English verb growan (to grow) and goes back into Western Germanic and Scandinavian languages.
The word designates the color on the visible light spectrum situated between blue and yellow. It is often used to describe foliage and the sea, and has become a symbol of environmentalism. It also is combined with other color names to increase specificity, as in blue-green, or with objects, as in emerald green. Green is also used to describe jealousy and envy, as well as anyone young, inexperienced, or gullible (probably by analogy to unripe, i.e. unready or immature, fruit).
Green is sometimes associated with nausea and sickness.
Lastly, green can communicate safety to proceed, as in traffic lights.
Overall, greens, along with blues and purples, are frequently described as cool colors, in contrast to red and yellow.
Some languages have no word separating green from blue.
The word green is found in several colloquial phrases derived from these meanings: in golf, the region of grass around the hole is trimmed short and referred to as the putting green, or simply, the green.
Someone who works well with plants is said to have a green thumb or green fingers, a physically-ill person is said to look green around the gills, and the word greenhorn refers to an inexperienced person.
A company is greenwashing if they advertise positive environmental practices to cover up environmental destruction.
Green with envy highlights another emotional association, which William Shakespeare had first described as the "green-eyed monster" in Othello and The Merchant of Venice.
In areas that use the U.S. Dollar as currency, green carries a connotation of money, wealth, and capitalism, because green is the color of United States banknotes, giving rise to the slang term greenback for cash.

Religion and Philosophy
The Libyan flag is completely green, in honor of Islam's veneration of the color.
Green is considered the traditional color of Islam, likewise because of its association with nature. This is for several reasons. First, Muhammad is reliably quoted in a hadith as saying that 'water, greenery, and a beautiful face' were three universally good things.
In the Qur'an, sura Al-Insan, believers in God in Paradise wear fine green silk.
Also, Al-Khidr (The Green One), is a Qur'anic figure who met and traveled with Moses. The flag of Hamas, as well as the flag of Iran, is green, symbolizing their Islamist ideology.
Roman Catholic and more traditional Protestant clergy wear green vestments at liturgical celebrations during Ordinary Time.
In the Eastern Catholic Church, green is the color of Pentecost.
Green is one of the Christmas colors as well, possibly dating back to pre-Christian times, when evergreens were worshipped for their ability to maintain their color through the winter season. Romans used green holly and evergreen as decorations for their winter solstice celebration called Saturnalia, which eventually evolved into a Christmas celebration.

The Wizard of Oz
One of the more notable uses of this meaning is found in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. In this story is the Emerald City, where everyone wears tinted glasses which make everything look green. According to the populist interpretation of the story, the city's color is used by the author, L. Frank Baum, to illustrate the financial system of America in his day, as he lived in a time when America was debating the use of paper money versus gold.

Metaphysics
Alice Bailey, in her system called the Seven Rays which classifies humans into seven different metaphysical psychological types, the "third ray" of "creative intelligence" is represented by the color green. People who have this metaphysical psychological type are said to be "on the Green Ray".
In Hinduism, Green is used to symbolically represent the fourth, heart chakra (Anahata).
Green Crystals
Psychics who claim to be able to observe the aura with their third eye report that someone with a green aura is typically someone who is in an occupation related to health, such as a physician or nurse, as well as people who are lovers of nature and the outdoors.

Green frequency is linked to healing and alchemy.
 Emerald Tablets of Thoth
 

 
Purple

Purple is a general term for the range of shades of color occurring between red and blue. In color theory, a 'purple' is defined as any non-spectral color between violet and red. The spectral color violet is not a purple.
In art, purple is the color on the color wheel between magenta and violet and its tints and shades. This color, electric purple, is shown below.
In human color psychology, purple is associated with royalty, regality, and nobility (stemming from its use in heraldry to denote gentry)
In metaphysics purple connects with the crown chakra.
Purple Crystals
In healing purple is good for emotional problems, rheumatism, epilepsy, reducing pain, deep tissue work, bones.
The Violet Flame is supposedly charged with the light of divine freedom. It is used to burn off karma from other lifetimes on all levels.
 

 
White
White is a tone, the perception which is evoked by light that stimulates all three types of color sensitive cone cells in the human eye in near equal amount and with high brightness compared to the surroundings.
Since the impression of white is obtained by three summations of light intensity across the visible spectrum, the number of combinations of light wavelengths that produce the sensation of white is practically infinite.
There are a number of different white light sources such as the midday Sun, incandescent lamps, fluorescent lamps and white LEDs. The impression of white light can also be created by mixing appropriate intensities of the primary colors of light - red, green and blue (RGB) - a process called additive mixing, as seen in many display technologies.
White light reflected off objects can be seen when no part of the light spectrum is reflected significantly more than others and the reflecting material has a degree of diffusion. This is seen when transparent fibers, particles, or droplets are in a transparent matrix of a substantially different refractive index. Examples include classic "white" substances such as sugar, foam, pure sand or snow, cotton, clouds, and milk.
Crystal boundaries and imperfections can also make otherwise transparent materials white, as in the milky quartz or the microcrystalline structure of a seashell. This is also true for artificial paints and pigments, where white results when finely divided transparent material of a high refractive index is suspended in a contrasting binder. Typically paints contain calcium carbonate and/or synthetic rutile with no other pigments if a white color is desired.

Paint
In painting, white can be crafted by reflecting ambient light from a white pigment, although the ambient light must be white light, or else the white pigment will appear the color of the light. White when mixed with black produces gray. To art students, the use of white can present particular problems, and there is at least one training course specializing in the use of white in art. In watercolor painting, white areas are the absence of paint on the paper. When mixing paints in order to get a lighter color, it's advisable to mix a small amount of color to white, rather than trying to add white to the color, as it will take considerably more paint to get the desired tint.

Metaphysics
White and Clear Quartz Crystals
White light is the octave (frequency) above purple. It has always been seen as transcendence, pure, perfection, innocence, chastity, the triumphant of spirit over the flesh, purity.
In Alchemy white is the feminine principle or highest frequency of though turning into pure consciousness.

Tradition
Wearing white links to the goddess in many civilizations.
Druid priests often wore white.
In Christian beliefs white is the highest color representing the purified soul, joy, virginity, integrity, light and a holy life. White is always worn in Christian religions at the sacraments of Baptism, First Communion, Confirmation, Marriage. In Catholicism it is symbolic of the saints not suffering martyrdom and virgin saints.
To the Buddhist tradition, white is self-mastery and redemption. It is representative of being lead from bondage - the highest spiritual transformation.
In Hinduism, white is symbolic of pure consciousness, upward movement, light, and manifestation.
Maori tradition holds white as meaning truce or surrendering.
In Mayan tradition it represented peace and health.
 

Orgone (/ˈɔːrɡoʊn/) is a pseudoscientific[concept variously described as an esoteric energy or hypothetical universal life force. Originally proposed in the 1930s by Wilhelm Reich,[10][11][12] and developed by Reich's student Charles Kelley after Reich's death in 1957, orgone was conceived as the anti-entropic principle of the universe, a creative substratum in all of nature comparable to Mesmer's animal magnetism (1779), to the Odic force (1845) of Carl Reichenbach and to Henri Bergson's élan vital (1907).[13] Orgone was seen as a massless, omnipresent substance, similar to luminiferous aether, but more closely associated with living energy than with inert matter. It could allegedly coalesce to create organization on all scales, from the smallest microscopic units—called "bions" in orgone theory—to macroscopic structures like organisms, clouds, or even galaxies.[14]
Reich argued that deficits or constrictions in bodily orgone were at the root of many diseases, most prominently cancer, much as deficits or constrictions in the libido could produce neuroses in Freudian theory. Reich founded the Orgone Institute ca. 1942[15] to pursue research into orgone energy after he immigrated to the US in 1939, and used it to publish literature and distribute material relating to the topic for more than a decade. Reich designed special "orgone energy accumulators"—devices ostensibly collecting orgone energy from the environment—to enable the study of orgone energy and to be applied medically to improve general health and vitality.[10] Ultimately, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) obtained a federal injunction barring the interstate distribution of orgone-related materials, on the grounds that Reich and his associates were making false and misleading claims. A judge later ruled to jail Reich and ordered the banning and destruction of all orgone-related materials at the institute after an associate of Reich violated the injunction.[11] Reich denied the assertion that orgone accumulators could improve sexual health by providing orgastic potency.[16]
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health lists orgone as a type of "putative energy".[17] After Reich's death, research into the concept of orgone passed to some of his students such as Kelley and later to a new generation of scientists in Germany keen to discover an empirical basis for the orgone hypothesis (the first positive results of which were provided in 1989 by Stefan Muschenich).[18] There is no empirical support for the concept of orgone in medicine or the physical sciences,[4] and research into the concept concluded with the end of the Institute. Founded in 1982, the Institute for Orgonomic Science in New York is dedicated to the continuation of Reich's work; it both publishes a digital journal on it and collects corresponding works.[19]













History[edit]
The concept of orgone belongs to Reich's later work, after he immigrated to the US. Reich's early work was based on the Freudian concept of the libido, though influenced by sociological understandings with which Freud disagreed but which were to some degree followed by other prominent theorists such as Herbert Marcuse and Carl Jung. While Freud had focused on a solipsistic conception of mind in which unconscious and inherently selfish primal drives (primarily the sexual drive, or libido) were suppressed or sublimated by internal representations (cathexes) of parental figures (the superego), for Reich libido was a life-affirming force repressed by society directly. For example, in one of his better known analyses Reich observes a workers' political rally, noting that participants were careful not to violate signs that prohibited walking on the grass; Reich saw this as the state co-opting unconscious responses to parental authority as a means of controlling behavior.[20] He was expelled from the Institute of Psycho-analysis because of these disagreements over the nature of the libido and his increasingly political stance. He was forced to leave Germany very soon after Hitler came to power.[21]


Reich with one of his cloudbusters, a device which supposedly could influence weather by altering levels of atmospheric orgone.
Reich took an increasingly bioenergetic view of libido, perhaps influenced by his tutor Paul Kammerer and another biologist, Otto Heinrich Warburg.[22] In the early 20th century, when molecular biology was in its infancy, developmental biology in particular still presented mysteries that made the idea of a specific life energy respectable, as was articulated by theorists such as Hans Driesch. As a psycho-analyst Reich aligned such theories with the Freudian libido, while as a materialist he believed such a life-force must be susceptible to physical experiment.
He wrote in his best known book, The Function of the Orgasm: "Between 1919 and 1921, I became familiar with Driesch's 'Philosophie des Organischen' and his 'Ordnungslehre'... Driesch's contention seemed incontestable to me. He argued that, in the sphere of the life function, the whole could be developed from a part, whereas a machine could not be made from a screw..... However, I couldn't quite accept the transcendentalism of the life principle. Seventeen years later I was able to resolve the contradiction on the basis of a formula pertaining to the function of energy. Driesch's theory was always present in my mind when I thought about vitalism. The vague feeling I had about the irrational nature of his assumption turned out to be justified in the end. He landed among the spiritualists."[23]
The concept of orgone was the result of this work in the psycho-physiology of libido. After his migration to the US, Reich began to speculate about biological development and evolution, and then branched out into much broader speculations about the nature of the universe.[13] This led him to the conception of "bions": self-luminescent sub-cellular vesicles that he believed were observable in decaying materials, and presumably present universally. Initially he thought of bions as electrodynamic or radioactive entities, as had the Ukrainian biologist Alexander Gurwitsch, but later came to the conclusion that he had discovered an entirely unknown but measurable force, which he then named "orgone",[13] a pseudo-Greek formation probably from org- "impulse, excitement" as in org-asm, plus -one as in ozone (the Greek neutral participle, virtually *ὄργον, gen.: *ὄργοντος).[24]
For Reich, neurosis became a physical manifestation he called "body armor"—deeply seated tensions and inhibitions in the physical body that were not separated from any mental effects that might be observed.[25] He developed a therapeutic approach he called vegetotherapy that was aimed at opening and releasing this body armor so that free instinctive reflexes—which he considered a token of psychic well-being—could take over.
Evaluation[edit]
Orgone was closely associated with sexuality: Reich, following Freud, saw nascent sexuality as the primary energetic force of life. The term itself was chosen to share a root with the word orgasm, which both Reich and Freud took to be a fundamental expression of psychological health. This focus on sexuality, while acceptable in the clinical perspective of Viennese psychoanalytic circles, scandalized the conservative American public even as it appealed to countercultural figures like William S. Burroughs and Jack Kerouac.
