Demodulation reference signals ( e.g. , DM - RSs ) are transmitted for a 5G , or other next generation network using an adaptive DM - RS structure . Demodulation reference signal data representative of demodulation reference signals employable to perform channel estimation of data channels is generated the demodulation reference signal data is trans mitted , via a channel other than the data channels , to be used for the channel estimation . The adaptive DM - RS structure can be based on a modulation scheme used for data trans mission . An orthogonal variable spreading factor code tree can be used when choosing an orthogonal cover code , and resource mapping for DM - RSs can be made unequal based on analysis of antenna ports . Further , a DM - RS with high resource density can be used to compensate for phase noise.
To provide a communication system that can realize data transmission at relatively high speed with relatively small delay and can accommodate a variety of communication terminal devices.SOLUTION: A communication system includes a plurality of communication terminal devices and a base station device for forming a cell capable of radio communication with the communication terminal devices. The base station device is configured to be able to set a radio format and a subcarrier interval of signals transmitted and received to/from the communication terminal devices for each communication terminal device. The subcarrier interval is set according to the movement speed of each of the communication terminal devices.

The invention discloses the resource allocation methods under a kind of downlink MIMO-NOMA network, based on the analysis of the channel state information of user, carry out user's sub-clustering, it is served as theme with the multi dimensional resource distribution research under downlink MIMO-NOMA network, comprehensively consider the multi dimensional resources such as space, frequency spectrum and power, network performance is measured with available capacity, establish the multi dimensional resource distribution model under downlink MIMO-NOMA network, using alternating iteration optimum theory restrain with low complex degree characteristic, rapidly realize optimal multi dimensional resource distribution.The present invention fully takes into account the features such as beam direction and business diversity, and the directive property of wave beam is met with user's sub-clustering, and the diversity of business is met with available capacity, realizes the multi dimensional resource distribution under downlink MIMO-NOMA network.

The present disclosure relates to a communication method and system for converging a 5th - Generation ( 5G ) commu nication system for supporting higher data rates beyond a 4th - Generation ( 4G ) system with a technology for Internet of Things ( IoT ) , and may be applied to intelligent services based on the 5G communication technology and the IoT related technology , such as smart home , smart building , smart city , smart car , connected car , health care , digital education , smart retail , security and safety services . The present disclosure describes methods for supporting uplink sub - band precoding for effective data transmission and reception , reporting a failure of channel state measurement of a terminal , and reporting a channel state according to multiple channel state information reference signal ( CSI RS ) transmission .

In a beamforming transmitter, the signal is constructed from multiple paths with defined phase shift relationship among them. A set of intermediate frequency beamforming signals are generated by introducing phase shifts based on numbers of cycles of a higher frequency local oscillator signal that is used for up-converting the set of the intermediate frequency signals. The set of the intermediate frequency signals with the defined phase shift relationship are then mixed with a data signal, such as an in-phase/quadrature (I/Q) data signal, and then up-converted to generate the set of beam forming signal supplied to an antenna array. A receiver using the same techniques for generating a set of local oscillator signals is also presented.
Provided are a digital predistortion structure and method for a hybrid large-scale MIMO array based on spatial domain feedback. The digital predistortion structure comprises multiple sub arrays; each sub array comprises a digital domain portion that performs predistortion processing on an input signal according to a feedback signal so as to obtain a predistortion signal, and an analog domain portion that comprises an analog beamforming network, a transmitting unit, a near-field feedback unit or a far-field feedback unit, and a feedback signal synthesizer; the analog beamforming network performs processing on the predistortion signal; the transmitting unit transmits a processed predistortion signal; the near-field feedback unit or the far-field feedback unit receives a transmit signal of the transmitting unit to generate a receive signal; the feedback signal synthesizer receives the receive signal of the near-field feedback unit or the far-field feedback unit to obtain the feedback signal, and transmits same to the digital domain portion.


Systems and methods for computing channel state information in a 5G wireless communication system in 4G spectrum frequencies is described herein. A method as described herein includes determining, by network equipment comprising a processor, that a cell in which the network equipment operates is configured for coexistence between new radio signals and long term evolution signals based on a starting symbol location for non-user equipment specific control signaling received from the cell relative to a frame boundary; predicting, by the network equipment in response to the determining that the cell is configured for the coexistence, long term evolution resource overhead data associated with the long term evolution signals; and determining, by the network equipment, channel state information reference resources at least in part by removing the long term evolution resource overhead data from channel state information computation data.

Abstract
A system includes a housing; one or more antennas mounted on the housing; and a processor to control a directionality of the antennas in communication with a predetermined target using 5G protocols.

The invention relates to the technical field of 5G communication, and discloses a high-safety 5G wireless communication device which comprises a shell and a communication assembly, wherein the communication assembly is arranged in the shell, a damping mechanism is arranged below the shell and is connected with the communication assembly through the damping mechanism, vent holes are formed in the upper ends of the left side and the right side of the shell, fans corresponding to the vent holes are fixedly connected to the left inner side wall and the right inner side wall of the shell, the wind directions of the two fans are arranged in the same direction, baffles are arranged in the two vent holes, and a plurality of uniformly distributed vent holes are formed in the surfaces of the baffles. This high 5G wireless communication device of security can send out the police dispatch newspaper when the inside high temperature of device to can remind people to enlarge draught area, improve the radiating efficiency, avoid communication device inner assembly to be damaged by high temperature, and be convenient for carry out diversified buffering to communication pole on the communication device, avoid causing the damage with other object clashes into, improve communication device's safety in utilization. The present invention provides a design framework that is used to develop new types of constrained turbo block convolutional (CTBC) codes that have higher performance than was previously attainable. The design framework is applied to design both random and deterministic constrained Related U.S. Application Data interleavers. Vectorizable deterministic constrained inter leavers are developed and used to design parallel architec sa- Yo Yos tures for real time SISO decoding of CTBC codes. A new signal mapping technique called constrained interleaved coded modulation (CICM) is also developed. CICM is then used to develop rate matching, spatial modulation, and MIMO modulation subsystems to be used with CTBC codes and other types of codes. By way of example, embodiments are primarily provided for improved 5G LTE and optical transport network (OTN) communication systems.

The invention discloses a 5G double-frequency-band high-isolation double-port common-ground monopole antenna, which is used for reducing mutual coupling caused by surface wave and conductive coupling of a floor, and changing the path of surface current of the floor and the distribution parameters of transmission lines by selecting a defect ground structure with a simpler decoupling structure, thereby achieving the purpose of improving isolation. In order to further improve the isolation between the antenna units and reduce the influence of mutual coupling on the impedance matching of two resonance points of the antenna, floor branches are selected to be loaded in the middle of the floor so as to reduce the mutual coupling between ports and improve the impedance matching of the antenna frequency band; meanwhile, proper parasitic units are designed to create reverse coupling paths to reduce mutual coupling. Because floor minor matters, parasitic element and defect ground structure all have design convenience, processing simple, and characteristics such as easy realization, this patent combines three kinds of decoupling structures to realize the high isolation characteristic of 5G double-frenquency monopole antenna altogether, still has the advantage that the interval is little, the design is simple, be convenient for adjust simultaneously.


The invention belongs to the technical field of wireless communication, and discloses a suspect identification and positioning tracking system and method based on a 5G wireless network, wherein the overall structure of the suspect identification and positioning tracking system based on the 5G wireless network comprises: the system comprises a perception layer, a transmission layer, a computing and storing resource layer and an application layer. The invention is based on a 5G wireless high-speed network, realizes real-time return of a monitoring video picture, and completes suspect identification and positioning tracking by combining face identification and binocular vision ranging technology; high-definition controllable wireless binocular vision cameras are densely deployed in urban areas, the cameras upload video pictures to nearest mobile edge nodes by using a 5G wireless high-speed network, and finally identification and positioning tracking of individual suspects are achieved. Experiments show that the time delay of the 5G wireless network provided by the invention is less than 35ms, the calculation time delay is 100ms, the total time delay is 2 x the network time delay plus the calculation time delay, and the total time delay is less than 200 ms.

The invention discloses a kind of 5G wireless access formula indoor distributed systems, it include: outdoor access unit include the donor antenna connected in order, the first radio frequency amplifier and the first digital processing unit, donor antenna is to the wireless connection established between outdoor access unit and the base station 5G, first radio frequency amplifier is amplified to the radiofrequency signal to donor antenna or the transmission of the first digital processing unit, and the first digital processing unit is connect with in-door covering unit；In-door covering unit includes the second digital processing unit, the second radio frequency amplifier and service antenna connected in order, second digital processing unit is connect with outdoor access unit, second digital processing unit is to convert signal, second radio frequency amplifier is to amplify radiofrequency signal, and service antenna is to the wireless connection established between in-door covering unit and indoor moving terminal；To realize that without disposing the base station 5G indoors be the covering for completing indoor signal, greatly saving 5G indoor signal disposes required cost.
A WTRU may determine that a LTE cell at least partially overlaps in frequency with an NR cell . The WTRU may determine that an NR transmission is to be received within a set of resources that are included in at least a portion of the NR cell that at least partially overlaps with the LTE cell . The WTRU may determine a subset of resources within the set of resources that correspond to an LTE common transmis sion . The WTRU may receive the NR transmission within the set of resources . The NR transmission may not be included in the subset of resources that correspond to the LTE common transmission . The LTE common transmission may include one or more of a common control signal , a cell - specific broadcast signal , cell - specific reference signals , a physical downlink control channel , a primary synchronization signal , a secondary synchronization signal , and / or a channel state information reference signal .

The communication device is configured to measure a downlink (DL) reference signal from the plurality of beams received via the transceiver to generate L1 data describing the plurality of beams, a level 1 (L1) process. Contains elements. The apparatus may also aggregate, select, or respond to the L1 data to generate L2 data corresponding to one or more of the plurality of beams in the first cell that match the pre-configured parameters. Also includes a level 2 (L2) processing element configured to filter. Further, the apparatus is coupled to the L1 and L2 processing elements and configured to generate L3 data corresponding to one or more of the plurality of beams of each of the first and second cells, level 3 ( L3) Including processing elements. The apparatus also includes a report generator coupled to the L1, L2, and L3 processing elements and configured to generate a report for the mobility event.

The example Mutual Authentication and Security Agreement (MASA) protocol is independent to securely communicate private information exchanged between the UE and various network side devices (eg, base station, MME, HSS, etc.) Integrity and / or encryption keys may be used. In particular, the exemplary MASA protocol may include an Initial Authentication Request (IAR) Encryption Key (KIARENC) for encrypting UE-specific information (eg, IMSI etc.) in an IAR message and / or private information in an IAS message. An initial authentication response (IAS) encryption key (KIASENC) may be used to encrypt the Furthermore, the MASA protocol of the embodiment is an IAR Integrity Protection Key (KIARINT) to verify the integrity of the information in the IAR message and / or an IAS Integrity Protection Key (KIASINT) to verify the integrity of the information in the IAS message. You may use KIARENC, KIARINT, KIASENC and / or KIASINT may be calculated independently by the UE and Home Subscriber Server (HSS).


The utility model discloses a mining flame-proof and intrinsic safety type 5G wireless base station, which comprises a baseband, a transformer, an optical module, a radio frequency module, a data acquisition module and a built-in battery pack; the wireless base station is arranged in the explosion-proof shell, the shell comprises a box body and an upper cover, and the contact surface of the box body and the upper cover adopts an explosion-proof junction surface design; a battery pack is arranged in the box body; the connection box body is also provided with a switch, and the switch is a knob switch for controlling the connection and disconnection of the power supply of the whole equipment in order to meet the requirements of explosion suppression and intrinsic safety in the mine; the upper cover department of access device is equipped with display screen viewing device, display screen viewing device is including setting up the display screen in the toughened glass observation window of upper cover and box, wireless basic station still sets a plurality of directional antenna. The utility model discloses the technique combines the characteristics of 5G technique, can establish wide, the communication liaison of coverage is convenient, bear wireless data big bandwidth, low time delay, the high reliable mining 5G wireless communication system in the colliery.

The present invention discloses a kind of extensive MIMO active antenna array applied to 5G millimetre-wave attenuator, including aerial array, multifunction board, multichannel TR component, wave control power module, aerial array is correspondingly arranged on multifunction board, and multichannel TR component and wave control power module are fixed on multifunction board and are connected with aerial array；The present invention uses large scale array antenna technology, realize phasing signal transmission, using the directive gain of phased array antenna come the space path loss of offseting signal, and the multiplexing of the Spatial Dimension of signal can be realized using the beam position dynamic adjustable feature of phased array antenna, substantially reduce interfering with each other between each user, the capacity of system is effectively improved, realizes low-power, the transmission of efficient signal.

A high gain , multi - beam lens antenna system for future fifth generation ( 5G ) wireless networks . The lens antenna includes a spherical dielectric lens fed with a plurality of radiating antenna elements . The elements are arranged around the exterior surface of the lens at a fixed offset with a predetermined angular displacement between each ele ment . The number of beams and crossover levels between adjacent beams are determined by the dielectric properties and electrical size of the lens . The spherical nature of the dielectric lens provides a focal surface allowing the elements to be rotated around the lens with no degradation in perfor mance . The antenna system supports wideband and multi band operation with multiple polarizations making it ideal for future 5G wireless networks .

The utility model relates to a solve 2.4G and disturb radio frequency circuit of 5G wireless performance. The circuit comprises a wifi chip, a 2.4G radio frequency module, a 5G radio frequency module is respectively in communication connection with the wifi chip, the 5G radio frequency module comprises a 5G FEM unit, a first matching circuit, a second matching circuit, a radio frequency circuit, a 5G radio frequency signal end, the first matching circuit, the radio frequency circuit, the second matching circuit, the 5G FEM unit is sequentially connected, the 5G FEM unit is output and connected to the wifi chip through the 5G FEM unit, the radio frequency circuit comprises a trap circuit, a high-pass filter circuit, the first matching circuit and the second matching circuit are respectively connected to the two ends of the high-pass filter circuit, and the trap circuit is connected to the high-pass filter circuit in parallel. The circuit solves the problems that a 2.4GHz transmission signal is coupled to a 5GHz receiving path through an antenna coupling or a combiner, so that a low noise amplifier and a receiver of a 5GHz receiving link are saturated and blocked, and the infinite throughput and the coverage performance of a 5G frequency band are influenced.A network element including a relay station disposed outside (22) Filed: Mar. 24, 2016 a structure, wherein the relay station is configured to convert a radio frequency signal received from a base station into Related U.S. Application Data baseband signals and to frame the baseband signals into data (60) Provisional application No. 62/140.224, filed on Mar. packets, and a transceiver disposed outside the Structure and 30, 2015. operably coupled to the relay station, wherein the transceiver s is configured to receive the data packets from the relay Publication Classification station and to transmit the data packets over copper wire pairs to a second transceiver disposed within the structure (51) Int. Cl. and coupled to an indoor radio station so that the indoor H04B 3/36 (2006.01) radio station is able to convert the data packets back into the H04L 5/14 (2006.01) radio frequency signal and transmit the radio frequency H04B 7/04 (2006.01) signal to a user equipment within the structure.
Techniques described herein are directed toward enabling location support for 5G New Radio ( NR ) wireless access by a user equipment ( UE ) by utilizing existing LTE location support . More specifically , LTE positioning protocol ( LPP ) messages may be communicated between a UE with NR wireless access and a location server ( e.g. an LMF ) in a 5G Core Network via an NG - RAN . The LPP messages may support RAT - independent and E - UTRA position methods by the UE such as A - GNSS or OTDOA for E - UTRA . The location server may obtain OTDOA related information from eNBs and ng - eNBs supporting LTE wireless access . A UE may request measurement gaps from a 5G base station ( e.g. gNB ) in order to obtain measurements for RAT - independent and E - UTRA position methods and may request an idle period in order to obtain LTE timing needed for E - UTRA measurements .

Techniques for presenting a symbol on a display of a wireless device indicative of wireless resources based on network states and device states are discussed herein. For example, the network state may indicate whether the wireless device is operating in a cellular network that has areas of dual signal coverage. A device state may include whether the device is actively communicating via a connection or is idle. The techniques may further determine a frequency of wireless resources associated with the dual connectivity environment. A network identifier can be presented via a display of the wireless device. Network identifiers might include, for example, symbols that indicate 3G, 4G, LTE, 5G, dual connectivity, and so forth, corresponding to different wireless network standards and/or connections.
